[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: journal/M13-albrechts-2004-strategic-spatial-planning-reexamined-10.1068-b3065.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Title:           b3065 743..758
Creator:         3B2 Total Publishing 6.05d/W
Producer:        Acrobat Distiller 3.01 for Windows
CreationDate:    Wed Aug 25 01:22:55 2004 WIB
ModDate:         Wed Aug 25 19:38:45 2004 WIB
Custom Metadata: no
Metadata Stream: yes
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            none
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           16
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       420.8 x 686 pts
Page rot:        0
File size:       164695 bytes
Optimized:       no
PDF version:     1.4
[Extracted Text]
Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design 2004, volume 31, pages 743 ^ 758


DOI:10.1068/b3065


Strategic (spatial) planning reexamined



Louis Albrechts
Catholic University of Leuven, Institute of Urban and Regional Planning, Kasteelpark Arenberg 51,
B 3001 Leuven, Belgium; e-mail: Louis.Albrechts@isro.kuleuven.ac.be
Received 27 August 2003; in revised form 20 January 2004



Abstract. In the 1990s a strategic approach to the organization of space at different levels of scale
became more prevalent. Increasingly, it is being assumed that the solutions to complex problems
depend on the ability to combine the creation of strategic visions with short-term actions. The
creation of strategic visions implies the design of shared futures, and the development and promotion
of common assets. Moreover, all of this requires accountability within a time and budgetary frame-
work and the creation of awareness for the systems of power. Delivering on these new demands
implies the development of an adapted strategic planning capacity and a shift in planning style in
which the stakeholders are becoming more actively involved in the planning process on the basis of a
joint definition of the action situation and of the sharing of interests, aims, and relevant knowledge. In
this paper I aim to provide building blocks for such an `alternative' strategic (spatial) planning
approach. It is based on two different sources. The first source is critical planning literature and
strategic thinking in business, which will be used to broaden the scope of the concept. The second
source consists of European strategic planning practices.


Introduction: revival of strategic planning
In the 1960s and 1970s strategic spatial planning in a number of Western countries
evolved towards a system of comprehensive planning at different administrative levels.
In the 1980s we witnessed a retreat from strategic planning, fuelled not only by the
neoconservative disdain for planning, but also by postmodernist skepticism, both of
which tend to view progress as something which, if it happens, cannot be planned
(Healey, 1997a). Instead the focus of urban and regional planning practices was on
projects (Motte, 1994; Secchi, 1986), especially for the revival of rundown parts of cities
and regions, and on land-use regulations.
    The growing complexity, an increasing concern about rapid and apparently random
development (Breheny, 1991), the problems of fragmentation, the dramatic increase in
interest (at all scales, from local to global) in environmental issues (Breheny, 1991), the
growing strength of the environmental movement, a reemphasis on the need for long-
term thinking (Friedmann, 2004; Newman and Thornley, 1996) and the aim to return
to a more realistic and effective method all served to expand the agenda. In response,
more strategic approaches, frameworks, and perspectives for cities, city-regions, and
regions had again become fashionable in Europe by the end of the millennium
(Albrechts, 1999; Albrechts et al, 2003; CEC, 1997; Healey et al, 1997; Pascual and
Esteve, 1997; Pugliese and Spaziante, 2003; Salet and Faludi, 2000). As there is no
`one best or one single way' to do strategic planning the purpose of this paper is to add
a new dimension in terms of values, approach, and process. It therefore reexamines
strategic (spatial) planning by highlighting differences with traditional land-use plan-
ning, by using views from strategic thinking in business and shifts in the overall
planning approach. This is done by combining theory with practical experience.
744                                                                            L Albrechts




Land-use planning
Aims
Land-use planning is basically concernedöin an integrated and qualitative wayöwith
the location, intensity, form, amount, and harmonization of land development required
for the various space-using functions: housing, industry, recreation, transport, educa-
tion, nature, agriculture, cultural activities (see also Chapin, 1965; Cullingworth, 1972).
In this way a land-use plan embodies a proposal as to how land should be used öin
accordance with a considered policy öas expansion and restructuring proceed in the
future.
A classification of EU land-use planning systems
The emergence of land-use planning systems across Europe has some common roots.
In many EU member states the first planning legislation was produced in the early
20th century as a response to increasing development pressure and the consequent
problems that arose from dense and disorganized development. Cultural, institutional,
and legal differences, but also the specificity of the purposes for which formal spatial
planning systems were originally introduced, produced a wide variety of planning
systems and traditions in the EU. The EU Compendium of Spatial Planning Systems
and Policies (CEC, 1997) draws a line between strategic planning at the regional or
national level and land-use planning at the level of the municipality and the functional
urban region. Recent practice (Albrechts et al, 2001; 2003; Healey et al, 1997; Pascual
and Esteve, 1997; Pugliese and Spaziante, 2003; Salet and Faludi, 2000), however,
illustrates that a lot of strategic planning is going on at the level of the city and the
urban agglomeration.
    Land-use planning at EU level clearly focuses on the municipality or functional
urban region (mainly Greece, France, Italy, and Sweden) with framework (master plan)
instruments and on specific areas within the municipality with regulatory instruments.
In Belgium land-use zoning also exists for subregions. The framework plans cover at
least the whole of the area of the local authority and set out the broad land-use and
infrastructure patterns across the area through zoning or land-allocation maps. The
regulatory plan covers the whole or part of the local authority's area and indicates
detailed site-specific zonings for building, land use and infrastructure.
    All the EU member states, except the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland,
use detailed planning instruments (regulatory zoning instruments, building control
instruments, and implementation instruments) which play a determining role in guid-
ing the location of development and physical infrastructure, and the form and size
development takes.
    The framework plans and the regulatory plans are mostly legally binding docu-
mentsöwith implied legal certainty and rigidity öonce approved (the major exception
is the United Kingdom); they are generally of no fixed duration and can be replaced
only by new plans. This often relates to the extent to which a system is binding or
discretionary (see CEC, 1997). In a binding system the relationship between policy and
control is expected to be determined through a binding detailed land-use plan. Effects
are compared with intentions like a blueprint for a house. This is the `conformance
view' (Barrett and Fudge, 1981). In a discretionary system each decision is subject to
administrative and political discretion, with the plan providing general guidance. This
relates to the `performance view' (see Mastop and Faludi, 1997). The United Kingdom
is the primary example of a discretionary system. Whereas in the binding system the
focus is on legal certainty there is a notable absence of certainty in the discretionary
system.
Strategic (spatial) planning reexamined                                              745




    Local governments are generally responsible for the production of these plans and
for most EU countries (Greece is an exception) the responsibility for approval is also
delegated to this level. Sometimes the local plans have to be formally approved by
another tier (regional or central) of government.
    Consultation with other tiers of government, administrations, and official agencies
are everywhere an essential part of the daily routine in plan making. There is also a
general commitment to consultation with the public (in the broadest sense). The
method and depth of public involvement vary considerably. The Scandinavian coun-
tries have a long-standing tradition, for others it remains very formal and restricted
(Greece, Italy, Portugal).
Criticism of land-use planning
Traditional land-use planning, as more passive, pragmatic, and localized planning,
aims at controlling land use through a zoning system. Land-use regulation, which in
Europe has been typically plan led (Davies et al, 1989), helps to steer developments in a
certain direction. Indeed, building permits are granted (or refused) if a project or
development proposal is in line (or not) with the approved land-use plan and regula-
tions. In this way the land-use plan ensures that undesirable developments do not occur
but it is not able to ensure that desirable developments actually take place where and
when they are needed. Cullingworth (1993) contrasts this European tradition with US
local zoning systems, which are driven by concern for the specification of land rights
rather than for managing the location of development (see also Healey, 1997b). The
approach to planning via a single policy field (that is, spatial planning) met fierce
opposition from other and usually more powerful policy fields. Although land-use
plans had formal status and served as official guidelines for implementation, when it
came down to the actual implementation, other policy fieldsöwhich, because of their
budgetary and technical resources, were needed for the implementationöwere easily
able to sabotage the spatial plans if they wanted (Kreukels, 2000; Scharpf and Schnabel,
1978). Moreover, it became increasingly clear that a number of different planning
conceptsösuch as the coherent, convenient, and compact city long advocated by
plannersöcannot be achieved solely through physical hard planning (see Hart, 1976).
    A major emphasis on the legally binding nature of most EU land-use plans provides
legal certainty but makes the plans far more rigid and inflexible and less responsive to
changing circumstances. The mainly comprehensive nature of land-use plans is at odds
with increasingly limited resources. Moreover, most land-use plans have a predominant
focus on `physical' aspects, providing `physical' solutions to social or economic prob-
lems. In this way they often abstract from real historically determinate parameters of
human activity and gratuitously assume the existence of transcendent operational
norms. Coproduction of plans with the major stakeholders and the involvement of
`weak' groups in the land-use planning process are (with the exception of some
experiences such as in Finland) nonexistent. The whole apparatus of adverse bargain-
ing, negotiation, compromise, and deadlock, which normally surrounds the planning
process, must be questioned.
    In all EU systems there is evidence (CEC, 1997) to suggest that systems should
become more open and less prescriptive in determining precise land uses in favor of a
more flexible system to respond more quickly and adequately to changing social and
economic circumstances and to the agenda of government reorganization.
746                                                                             L Albrechts




Strategy and strategic planning in the literature
There are no single universally definitions for strategy and strategic planning. Various
authors and practitioners use the term differently. In my selective reading of the
literature I look for building blocks to broaden the perspective.
Historical roots
The word `strategy' originated within a military context. Webster's dictionary (Webster,
1970, page 867) defines strategy as `strategia', ``science and art of employing the polit-
ical, the economic, psychological and military forces of a nation or group of nations to
afford the maximum support to adopted policies in peace or war''. The current paper is
not about the military sense of strategy.
     According to Kaufman and Jacobs (1987), strategic planning originated in the
1950s in the private sector. Its roots were tied to the need for rapidly changing and
growing corporations to plan effectively for and manage their futures when the future
itself seemed to be increasingly uncertain (that is, strategic planning carried out by an
organization for its own activities). In the early 1970s, government leaders in the USA
became increasingly interested in strategic planning as a result of wrenching changesö
oil crisis, demographic shifts, changing values, volatile economy, etcö(Eadie, 1983;
cited in Bryson and Roering, 1988, page 995). In the early 1980s, a series of articles
in the USA called on state and local governments to use the strategic planning
approach developed in the corporate world (Kaufman and Jacobs, 1987).
     For Mastop (1998), the first traces of strategic spatial planning in northwestern
Europe date back to the 1920s and 1930s. He links strategic spatial planning closely to
the idea of the modern nation-state. Strategic planning is used here to direct the
activities of others (different authorities, different sectors, private actors). The differ-
ences in origin and tradition between US and European traditions reflect the historical
`statist' traditions of many postwar European states, which are linked to a battery of
welfare state policies (Batley and Stoker, 1991; Esping-Anderson, 1990; cited by Healey,
1997a).
Looking for building blocks in business and planning literature
There is a large amount of literature in the USA about the use of strategy and strategic
planning in business and nonprofit organizations and a growing literature in Europe
about strategic planning. Mintzberg et al (1998) conclude their historical survey of
strategy making by emphasizing the fact that it should be concerned with process
[for Healey (1997a) it is clearly a social process, and for Kunzmann (2000) it is public
sector led] and content, statics and dynamics, constraint and inspiration, the cognitive
and the collective, the planned and the learned, and the economic and the political.
Quinn (1980) cites a few studies that have suggested some initial criteria for evaluating
a strategy: clarity, motivational impact, internal consistency, compatibility with the envi-
ronment, appropriateness in light of the resources available, degree of risk, the extent
to which it matches the often contradictory personal values of key figures, time
horizon, flexibility, workability, focus on key concepts, and thrust and committed
leadership (see also Poister and Streib, 1999). Others (Bryson, 1995; Bryson and Roering,
1988; Poister and Streib, 1999) stress the need to gather the key (internal and external)
stakeholders (preferably key decisionmakers), the importance of external trends and
forces, the active involvement of senior level managers, to construct a longer term vision
(Kunzmann, 2000; Mintzberg, 1994; Mintzberg et al, 1998), the need to focus on
implementation, to build commitment to plans (see also Albrechts, 1995; Granados
Cabezas, 1995; Van den Broeck, 1996), and to be politically realistic. Faludi and Korthals
Altes (1994) and Faludi and Van der Valk (1994, page 3) make a distinction between
project plans and strategic plans (table 1). They define project planning as the opposite
Strategic (spatial) planning reexamined                                                       747




Table 1. Project plans and strategic plans (source: Faludi and Van der Valk, 1994, page 3).

                    Project plans             Strategic plans

Object              Material                  Decisions
Interaction         Until adoption            Continuous
Future              Closed                    Open
Time element        Limited to phasing        Central to problems
Form                Blueprint                 Minutes of last meeting
Effect              Determinate               Frames of reference


of strategic planning. Strategic plans are defined as frameworks for action. They need to
be analyzed for their performance in helping with subsequent decisions. Project plans
are blueprint plans and form an unambiguous guide to action. For Granados Cabezas
(1995) strategic planning anticipates new tendencies, discontinuities, and surprises;
it concentrates on openings and ways of taking advantage of new opportunities.

Towards a workable normative viewpoint on strategic planning
Reflecting on the challenges spatial planning is facing and relying on the experience
accumulated from business, planning practice, and a study of the planning literature
leads us to the following viewpoint on the `what' of strategic spatial planning: strategic
spatial planning is a public-sector-led (Kunzmann, 2000) sociospatial (see Healey,
1997a for the emphasis on the social) process through which a vision, actions, and means
for implementation are produced that shape and frame what a place is and may become.
A combination of characteristics related to the `how' of strategic planning gives a specific
coloring to the concept. A first characteristic is that strategic planning has to focus on a
limited number of strategic key issue areas (Bryson and Roering, 1988; Poister and Streib,
1999; Quinn, 1980); it has to take a critical view of the environment in terms of determining
strengths and weaknesses in the context of opportunities and threats (Kaufman and
Jacobs, 1987); it studies the external trends, forces (Poister and Streib, 1999) and resources
available (Quinn, 1980); it identifies and gathers major stakeholders (public and private)
(Bryson and Roering, 1988; Granados Cabezas, 1995); it allows for a broad (multilevel
governance) and diverse (public, economic, civil society) involvement during the planning
process; it develops a (realistic) long-term vision or perspective and strategies (Healey,
1997a; 1997b; Kunzmann, 2000; see also Mintzberg, 1994) at different levels (Albrechts
et al, 2003; Quinn, 1980), taking into account the power structures (Albrechts, 2003a;
Poister and Streib, 1999; Sager, 1994), uncertainties (Friend and Hickling, 1987; Quinn,
1980) and competing values; it designs plan-making structures and develops content
(Mintzberg et al, 1998) images, and decision frameworks (Faludi and Van der Valk,
1994) for influencing and managing spatial change (Healey, 1997b); it is about build-
ing new ideas (Mintzberg et al, 1998) and processes that can carry them forward
(Mintzberg, 2002), thus generating ways of understanding, ways of building agreements,
and ways of organizing and mobilizing for the purpose of exerting influence in different
arenas (Healey, 1997a); and finally it (both in the short and the long term) is focused
on decisions (Bryson, 1995), actions (Faludi and Korthals Altes, 1994; Mintzberg, 1994),
results (Poister and Streib, 1999), and implementation (Bryson, 1995; Bryson and Roering,
1988), and incorporates monitoring, feedback, and revision.
    This may seem to some people (see Mintzberg, 1994) too broad a view of strategic
planning. However, the many experiences documented in the planning literature
(Albrechts et al, 2001; 2003; Healey et al, 1997; Pascual and Esteve, 1997; Pugliese
and Spaziante, 2003) back up this broader view. This view also implies that strategic
(spatial) planning is not a single concept, procedure, or tool. In fact, it is a set of
748                                                                                    L Albrechts




concepts, procedures, and tools that must be tailored carefully to whatever situation is
at hand if desirable outcomes are to be achieved (Bryson and Roering, 1996). Strategic
planning is as much about process, institutional design, and mobilization as about
the development of substantive theories. Content is related to the strategic issues
selected in the process. In Europe the environmental agenda is linked in part to the
environmental movement's emphasis on sustainable resource use and in part to citizen
movements concerned with the quality of life in specific places (see Hall and Pfeiffer,
2000) and the appreciation of their diversity (Healey, 1997a). `Sustainable development'
has become a widely used concept expressing the potential for creating a positive-
sum strategy combining economic, environmental, and social objectives in their spatial
manifestation. In this way it supersedes the mere focus on land use. The `place focus' in
turn is linked to a political ^ cultural momentum to reassert the importance of regional
or local identity and image in the face of European `integration' and globalization.
    The term `spatial' brings into focus the `where of things', whether static or dynamic;
the creation and management of special `places' and sites; the interrelations between
different activities in an area, and significant intersections and nodes within an area
which are physically colocated (see also Healey, 2004). The focus on the spatial relations


      Type of planning                                       Type of plans


 From       Controlling change                                 Land-use plans
            Guiding growth
            Promoting development
            Regulation of private development
            Technical or legal regulation




                                `Physical' solutions to social problems




 To         Framework or guidelines for
            integrated development                            Strategic plans
            Works through the interests                          vision
            of selected stakeholders                             short-term actions
            Managing change
            Negotiated form in governance




                  Framing activities of stakeholders to help achieve shared concerns
                  about spatial changes




Figure 1. From traditional land-use planning to strategic planning.
Strategic (spatial) planning reexamined                                                749




of territories allows for a more effective way of integrating different agendas (economic,
environmental, cultural, and social policy agendas) as these agendas impact on localities
and of translating territorial development into specific investment programmes and
regulatory practices (Albrechts et al, 2003; see also Wilkinson and Appelbee, 1999).
Strategic frameworks and visions for territorial development, with an emphasis on place
qualities and the spatial impacts and integration of investments, complement and provide
a context for specific development projects. They also carry a potential for a `rescaling'
of issue agendas down from the national or state level and up from the municipal level.
This search for new scales of policy articulation and new policy concepts is also linked to
attempts to widen the range of actors involved in policy processes, with new alliances,
stakeholder partnerships, and consultative processes (Albrechts et al, 2001; 2003; Healey
et al, 1997). A territorial focus also provides a promising basis for encouraging levels
of government to work together (multilevel governance) and in partnership with actors
in diverse positions in the economy and civil society (Albrechts, 1999; Fu«rst, 2001;
Kunzmann, 2001a).
    The capacity of strategic spatial planning systems to deliver the desired outcome is
dependent not only on the system itself, but also on the conditions underlying it (see
also Mintzberg, 1994). These conditionsöincluding public and professional attitudes
towards spatial planning (in terms of planning content and process) and the political
will on the part of the institutions involved in setting the process in motion (Granados
Cabezas, 1995)öaffect the ability of planning systems to implement the chosen strat-
egies. The steps required to deliver and to implement the desired spatial outcome vary
according to the underlying structure.
    This normative viewpoint produces a quite different picture from traditional land-use
planning in terms of plans (strategic plans), type of planning (providing a framework),
and governance type (negotiated form of governance). Its rationale is to frame the
activities of stakeholders to help achieve shared concerns about spatial changes (see
figure 1).

Principles and points of departure for change
The efforts underway in many parts of Europe to produce strategies for cities, city-
regions, and regions (Albrechts et al, 2001; 2003; Healey et al, 1997; Pascual and
Esteve, 1997; Pugliese and Spaziante, 2003; Salet and Faludi, 2000) reorient spatial
planning in the direction of a more strategic type of planning. Often these efforts
involve the construction of new institutional arenas within structures of government,
which are themselves changing. Their motivations are varied, but the objectives have
typically been to articulate a more coherent spatial logic for land-use regulation, for
resource protection, for action orientation, for a more open type of governance,
for introducing sustainability, and for investments in regeneration and infrastructure.
    Just as in general planning, there are different traditions of strategic planning.
I therefore exemplify some principles of my `new dimension' of strategic planning in
terms of values, approach, and process.
Values and visioning
To keep planning from becoming more concerned with how to plan rather than with
the content of planning, substantive rationality (Mannheim) or value rationality
(Weber) are (re)introduced (De Jouvenel, 1964; Ozbekhan, 1969). This is needed to
counteract the pure instrumental rationality that encourages an analysis of trends
and extrapolates them in order to arrive at conceptions of social and economic futures.
Speaking of values (for instance, spatial quality and subsidiarity) is a way of describing
the sort of place we want to live in, or think we should live in. The values and the
750                                                                           L Albrechts




images of what a society wants to achieve are defined in the planning process. Values
and images are not generated in isolation but areöwithin a specific contextöcreated and
given meaning. They are validated by traditions of belief and practice, and are reviewed,
reconstructed, and invented through collective experience (see Ozbekhan, 1969; but also
Elchardus et al, 2000, page 24; Foucault, 1980, page 11). The introduction of value
rationality is thus a clear reaction against a future that extrapolates the past and
maintains the status quo. It means that time flows from the `invented' future, which
challenges conventional wisdom, toward and into the experienced present. This means
inventing a world that would not otherwise be (Mintzberg et al, 1998; Ozbekhan, 1969).
In this way strategic planning `creates' a vision for a future environment, but all
decisions are made in the present. This means that over time the strategic planning
process must stay abreast of changes in order to make the best decisions it can at
any given point. It must manage, as well as plan, strategically. This `created future' has
to be placed within a specific context (economic, social, political, and power), place,
time, and scale with regard to specific issues and a particular combination of actors.
It provides the setting for the process but also takes form, undergoes changes in the
process. All this must be rooted in an understanding of the past.
Inclusive and accountable
Just as there are many traditions and collectivities, so also there are many images of
what communities want to achieve (see Weeks, 1993). The opportunities for implement-
ing these images are not equal. Some individuals and groups have more resources and
power, which allow them to pursue their images. To give power to the range of images
in a planning process requires a capacity to listen, not just for the expression of
material interest, but also for what people care about, including the rage felt by
many who have grown up in a world of prejudice and exclusion, of being the outsider,
`the other' (Forester, 1989; Healey, 1997b). At the core of this process is a democratic
struggle for inclusiveness in democratic procedures, for transparency in government
transactions, for accountability of the state and planners to the citizens they work
for, for the right of citizens to be heard and to have a creative input in matters
affecting their interests and concerns at different scale levels, and for reducing or
eliminating unequal power structures between social groups and classes (see also
Friedmann and Douglas, 1998). Forester (1989) and Albrechts (1999) stress in this
respect that the planners are not only instrumental, and their implicit responsibility
can no longer simply be to `be efficient', to function smoothly as neutral means to given
(and presumably well-defined) ends. Planners must be more than navigators who
keep their ship on course. They must be deeply involved in formulating that course
(Forester, 1989) and they must become an active force in providing direction for change
by using the power available to them to anticipate and to counter the efforts of interests
that threaten to make a mockery of the democratic planning process by misusing their
power.
    Open dialogue, accountability, collaboration, and consensus building have become
key concepts. An open dialogue may have advantages as new people, new alliances,
new networks, and new ideas are brought together, and as new arenas (see Bryson and
Crosby, 1992) are provided in which strategy articulation takes place. The institutional
capacity of a place or community is built up by means of these arenas, taking into
account the very unequal balances of power. Moreover, these arenas may enable pro-
cesses and may provide some initial form of a social basis reflecting plurality and
diversity (see Sandercock, 1998). Developments toward more direct forms of democracy
and the focus on debate, public involvement, and accountabilityöeven with the best
intentionsöcontain the danger of making democratic public involvement more and
Strategic (spatial) planning reexamined                                                         751




more dependent on knowledge and skills that only the more highly educated possess
(see Benveniste, 1989, page 67). These developments may contribute to the conversion
of socioeconomic inequality into political inequality. Research on public involvement in
a local referendum (Elchardus et al, 2000) illustrates that the more highly educated
were twelve times overrepresented. Therefore empowerment (see Friedmann, 1992) is
needed for ordinary citizens and deprived groups to overcome the structural elements
of unequal access to and distribution of resources, and to overcome inequalities in
social position, class, skills, status, gender, and financial means.

Emerging alternative process
Macrostructure
The alternative strategic (spatial) planning I propose moves away from the idea of
government as the mobilizer of the public sector and the provider of solutions to
problems, towards an idea of governance as the capacity to substantiate the search
for creative and territorially differentiated solutions to problems or challenges and for a
more desirable future situation through the mobilization of a plurality of actors with
different and even competing interests, goals and strategies (see also Balducci and
Fareri, 1999). This implies a degree of selectivity (means are limited) and the mutual
dependency of actors, which means that problems cannot be solved and challenges
cannot be met by just one actor. They require the prospect of a win ^ win situation and
the involvement of actors on an equal basis.
    Delivering on the principles discussed implies the development of a different
strategic planning capacity (see figure 2) that has the ability, in an open and creative
way, to construct alternative futures and to respond to the growing complexity,
to new demands on traditional representative democracy, and to prevailing power
structures.
    Strategic planning is centered on the elaboration of a mutually beneficial dialectic
between top-down structural developments and bottom-up local uniqueness. Indeed, a
mere top-down and centrally organized approach runs the danger of overshooting the
local, historically evolved, and accumulated knowledge and qualification potential,
whereas a one-dimensional emphasis on a bottom-up approach tends to deny öor at
least to underestimate öthe importance of linking local traditions with structural
macrotendencies (Albrechts and Swyngedouw, 1989). Strategic planning is selective
and oriented to issues that really matter. As it is impossible to do everything that
needs to be done, `strategic' implies that some decisions and actions are considered


  Specific problems
                                                    Track 1
 Challenges
                                                              Integrated        Short-term up
                                     Kick-off       Track 2   strategic         to long-term
              Agenda setting         report                   plan              actions

                                                    Track 3


        Cooperation


                                          Track 4




Figure 2. Possible macrostructure for the overall strategic planning process.
752                                                                           L Albrechts




more important than others and that much of the process lies in making the tough
decisions about what is most important for the purpose of producing fair, structural
responses to problems, challenges, aspirations, and diversity. Strategic planning relates
to implementation. Things must get done! This is seen as the pattern of purposes,
policy statements, plans, programs, actions (short, medium, and long term), decisions,
and resource allocation that defines what a policy is in practice, what it does, and why
it does itöfrom the points of view of various affected publics (Bryson and Crosby,
1992, page 296). This stresses the need to find effective connections between political
authorities and implementation actors (officers, individual citizens, community organi-
zations, private corporations, and public departments (see Albrechts, 2003b; Hillier,
2002). Strategic spatial planning is not just a contingent response to wider forces, but
is also an active force in enabling change. This strategic planning cannot be theorized
as though its approaches and practices were neutral with respect to class, gender, age,
race, and ethnicity (Albrechts, 2002; Sandercock, 1998).
    All of these factors, of course, have an impact on the role, the position, and the
skills of strategic planners. Strategic planners have on several occasions acted as
catalysts (Albrechts, 1999; Mintzberg, 1994), as counterweights, and as initiators of
change (Albrechts, 1999; Krumholz, 1982). They mobilize and build alliances. They
present real political opportunities, learning from action not only what works but
also what matters. They substantiate change and refuse to function smoothly as neutral
means to given and presumably well-defined ends.
    Strategic planning does not flow smoothly from one phase to the next. It is a
dynamic and creative process. New points of view and facts that come to light today
might very well alter certain decisions made yesterday.
Four-track approach
The four-track approach is based on interrelating four types of rationality: value
rationality (the design of alternative futures), communicative rationality (involving a
growing number of actorsöprivate and publicöin the process), instrumental ration-
ality (looking for the best way to solve the problems and achieve the desired future), and
strategic rationality (a clear and explicit strategy for dealing with power relationships)
(see Albrechts, 2003a).
    The four tracks (Albrechts et al, 1999; see also Van den Broeck, 1987; 2001) can be
seen as working tracks: one for the vision, a second for the short-term and long-term
actions, a third for the involvement of the key actors, and finally a fourth track for a
more permanent process (mainly at the local level) involving the broader public in
major decisions (see figure 3). The proposed tracks may not be viewed in a purely linear
way. The context forms the setting of the planning process but also takes form and
undergoes changes in the process (see Dyrberg, 1997). In the first track the emphasis
is on the long-term vision. The vision is constructed (communicative rationality) in
relation to the social values (value rationality) to which a particular environment is
historically committed (see Ozbekhan, 1969). The creation of a vision is a conscious and
purposive action to represent values and meanings for the future. Power is at the heart
of these values and meanings (strategic rationality). To avoid pure utopian thinking, the
views of social critics such as Harvey, Friedmann, and Krumholz have been integrated
into the first track.
    In track 2 the focus is on creating trust by solving problems through actions on a
very short term. It concerns acting in such a way as to make the future conform to the
vision constructed in track 1 and to tackle problems in view of this vision. In this track
the four types of rationality interrelate.
Strategic (spatial) planning reexamined                                                          753




                    Context of place                          Policy questions and
                                                              issues involved




                          Long-term vision
  Track 1                                                          Value rationality




                                                                 Strategic rationality
                      Long-term and short-term
                      actions

  Track 2
                                                                  Communicative rationality


                      Contact with stakeholders
                                                             Instrumental rationality

  Track 3


                    Basic process with citizens
  Track 4


Figure 3. Four-track approach with tentative integration of different concepts of rationality.

     As spatial planning has almost no potential for concretizing strategies, so track 3
involves relevant actors needed for their substantive contribution, their procedural
competences, and the role they might play in acceptance, in getting basic support
and in providing legitimacy. The technical skills and the power to allocate sufficient
means to implement proposed actions are both usually spread over a number of diverse
sectors, actors and departments. Integration in its three dimensions ösubstantive,
organizational, and instrumental (legal, budget) öis at stake here.
     The fourth track is about an inclusive and more permanent empowerment process
(Forester, 1989; Friedmann, 1992) involving citizens in major decisions. In this process,
citizens learn about one another and about different points of view, and they come to
reflect on their own points of view. In this way a store of mutual understanding can be
built up, a sort of `social and intellectual capital' (see Innes, 1996; but see also the more
critical view of Mayer, 2003).
     The end product consists of an analysis of the main processes shaping our
environment, a dynamic, integrated, and indicative long-term vision (frame), a plan
for short-term and long-term actions, a budget, and a strategy for implementation.
By introducing value rationality, this approach transcends mere contingency planning
(for contingency planning see Alexander, 1988; Sager, 1994). The output of the process
constitutes a consensus or (partial) disagreement between the key actors. For the imple-
mentation, credible commitments to action engagement (commitment package) are
needed where planners, citizens, the private sector, and different levels of governance
enter moral, administrative, and financial agreements to realize these actions (on the
social contract/collective spatial agreement see also Albrechts, 1995; Granados Cabezas,
1995; Van den Broeck, 1996).
754                                                                               L Albrechts




    To make formal decisionmaking and implementation more responsive to the
context and to the agreements reached during the plan-making process, the four-track
approach invites politicians, citizens, sector experts, and the arenas in which they meet
to be active from start to finish in the entire process, including the agenda setting, the
design of plans, the political ratification, and the practical implementation (see also
Flyvbjerg, 2002). In this way, the arenas are used not as locations devoid of power, but
rather as vehicles that acknowledge and account for the working of power and for the
passionate commitment of planners and other actors who care deeply about the issues
at hand (Flyvbjerg, 2002).
    The proposed four-track approach cannot change the power relations, but I am
confident (see also Forester, 1989; Healey, 1997b; Innes, 1994; Sager, 1994) that empow-
erment, as developed in track 4, supports wider, collective efforts to change such
relations.
Preconditions
All of this requires a clear view of the mandates and responsibilities of all actors. Key
actors who take part in the discussions bring the consensus or disagreement before the
formal institutions (city council, parliament) and before sectoral departments and
private institutions or agents in charge of implementation. This may stimulate a fair
communication of the discussions that took place in the plan-making process, and
a refined articulation of meaning, visions, and policy ideas constructed during the
process (see also Bryson and Crosby, 1992).
     At the start of the process, the relevant actors must become conscious of the unequal
distribution of power in all stages of the planning process. This means that the strategic
rationality of actors (individual, group, institutional, corporate) who calculate the feasi-
bility of realizing their interests as opposed to the interests of their opponents must
interrelate with the communicative rationality. A process solely dominated by experts
and powerful actors must be avoided. This approach implies a minimal willingness to
tackle the problems through interactive policy processes that allow others to have a say
in their own policy domain. It also implies a willingness to accept decisions made
through a network organization, including decisions that may depart from a generic
policy. This is proving to be a very critical issue for traditional actors. This `alternative'
strategic planning demands a decisionmaking style in which the stakeholders become
more actively involved in solving policy problems on the basis of a joint definition of the
actual situation and of the sharing of interests, aims, and relevant knowledge. Active
involvement, open dialogue, accountability, collaboration, and consensus building
become key terms in most of the planning discourse. This implies collaboration on
equal terms in all phases of the strategic planning process. `Building trust' becomes a
buzz phrase.

Epilogue
The `alternative' strategic planning presented in this paper is conceived as a demo-
cratic, open, selective, and dynamic process. It produces a vision to frame problems,
challenges, and short-term actions within a revised democratic tradition. A dissection
of the process reveals the key elements that underlie this strategic planning: it involves
content and process, statics and dynamics, constraints and aspiration, the cognitive
and the collective, the planned and the learned, the socioeconomic and the political,
the public and the private, the vision and the action, the local and the global, legiti-
macy and a revised democratic tradition, values and facts, selectivity and integrativity,
equality and power, long term and short term.
Strategic (spatial) planning reexamined                                                        755




     I have applied the `lenses' of a reflective practitioner and of the (strategic) planning
literature in an effort to broaden the concept and provide an alternative to address the
challenges of our postmodern world in a constructive and progressive way. Strategic
planning case studies (Albrechts, 1999; Albrechts et al, 2003; Healey et al, 1997; Pascual
and Esteve, 1997; Pugliese and Spaziante, 2003) illustrate innovative practices. Scho«n
(1984) sees a need to inquire into the epistemology of practice, to make sense of what
has been learned in action in relation to a wider context, and to test the depth and
comprehensiveness of these practices. This would help efforts to evaluate and make
sense of these practices in relation to a wider (theoretical) context. Abstract conceptual-
ization and generalization of the accumulated knowledge of learning in action may
help heorists to see some of what can be learned from practice. Strategic planners, on
the other hand, can be inspired and guided by new emerging theories. The critical question
of the leverage that these strategic spatial planning exercises will achieve over time must
be raised. Do they have the persuasive power to shift territorial development trajectories
or, as some argue (Kunzmann, 2001a; 2001b; 2001c), are they little more than a cosmetic
veil to hide the growing disparities evolving within Europe? The European experiences
(Albrechts et al, 2001; 2003; CEC, 1999; Healey et al, 1997; Pasqual and Esteve, 1997;
Pugliese and Spaziante, 2003) provide a fertile laboratory for advancing the understanding
of the nature and potential of strategic spatial frameworks and strategies for 21st-century
conditions.
Acknowledgements. I would like to acknowledge the comments of two anonymous referees.
References
Albrechts L, 1995, ``Baªtir le visage d'une rëgion'' [Constructing the image of a region] DISP 122
    29 ^ 34
Albrechts L, 1999, ``Planners as catalysts and initiators of change: the new Structure Plan for
    Flanders'', in European Planning Studies 7 587 ^ 603
Albrechts L, 2002, ``The planning community reflects on enhancing public involvement: views
    from academics and reflective practitioners'' Planning Theory and Practice 3 331 ^ 347
Albrechts L, 2003a, ``Planning and power: towards an emancipatory planning approach''
    Environment and Planning C: Government and Policy 21 905 ^ 924
Albrechts L, 2003b, ``Reconstructing decision-making: planning versus politics'' Planning Theory
    2 249 ^ 268
Albrechts L, Swyngedouw E, 1989, ``The challenges for a regional policy under a flexible regime of
    accumulation'', in Regional Policy at the Crossroads Eds L Albrechts, F Moulaert, P Roberts,
    E Swyngedouw (Jessica Kingsley, London) pp 67 ^ 89
Albrechts L, Leroy P, van den Broeck J, van Tatenhove J, Verachtert K, 1999, ``Opstellen van een
    methodiek voor geintegreerd gebiedsgericht beleid'' [A methodology for integrated area
    development] KU Leuven, KU Nijmegen, Leuven; copy available from author
Albrechts L, Alden J, Da Rosa Pires A (Eds), 2001 The Changing Institutional Landscape of
    Planning (Ashgate, Aldershot, Hants)
Albrechts L, Healey P, Kunzmann K, 2003, ``Strategic spatial planning and regional governance
    in Europe'' Journal of the American Planning Association 69 113 ^ 129
Alexander E, 1988, ``After rationality: towards a contingency theory for planning'' Society 26(1)
    15 ^ 19
Balducci A, Fareri P, 1999, ``Consensus-building, urban planning policies, and the problem of
    scale: examples from Italy'', in Participation and the Quality of Environmental Decision
    Making Eds F Coenen, D Huitema, L O'Toole (Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht) pp 163 ^ 178
Barrett S, Fudge C (Eds), 1981 Planning and Action (Methuen, London)
Batley R, Stoker G (Eds), 1991 Local Government in Europe (Macmillan, London)
Benveniste G, 1989 Mastering the Politics of Planning (Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA)
Breheny M, 1991, ``The renaissance of strategic planning?'' Environment and Planning B: Planning
    and Design 18 233 ^ 249
Bryson J M, 1995 Strategic Planning for Public and Nonprofit Organizations (Jossey-Bass,
    San Francisco, CA)
756                                                                                    L Albrechts




Bryson J, Crosby B, 1992 Leadership for the Common Good: Tackling Public Problems in a Shared-
    power World (Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA)
Bryson J M, Roering W D, 1988, ``Initiation of strategic planning by governments'' Public
    Administration Review 48 995 ^ 1004
Bryson J M, Roering W D, 1996, ``Strategic planning options for the public sector'', in Handbook
    of Public Administration Ed. J L Perry, 2nd edition (Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA)
CEC, 1997 The EU Compendium of Spatial Planning Systems and Policies Commission of the
    European Communities (Office for the Official Publications of the European Communities,
    Luxembourg)
CEC, 1999 European Spatial Development Perspective: Towards Balanced and Sustainable
    Development of the Territory of the EU Commission for the European Communities (Office
    for the Official Publications of the European Communities, Luxembourg)
Chapin F S, 1965 Urban Land Use Planning (University of Illinois Press, Urbana, IL)
Cullingworth J B, 1972 Town and Country Planning in Britian (Allen and Unwin, London)
Cullingworth J B, 1993 Planning Control in Comparative Context (Routledge, London)
Davies H, Edwards D, Hooper A, Punter J, 1989 Planning Control in Western Europe (HMSO,
    London)
De Jouvenel B, 1964 L'art de la conjecture [The art of conjecture] (Du Rocher, Monaco)
Dyrberg T B, 1997 The Circular Structure of Power (Verso, London)
Eadie D C, 1983, ``Putting a powerful tool to practical use: the application of strategic planning
    in the public sector'' Public Administration Review 43 447 ^ 452
Elchardus M, Hooghe M, Smits W, 2000, ``De vormen van middenveld particpatie'' [Different
    forms of intermediary participation], in Het maatschappelijk middenveld in Vlaanderen
    [Civil society in Flanders] (VUB Press, Brussels) pp 15 ^ 46
Esping-Anderson G, 1990 The Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism (Polity Press, Cambridge)
Faludi A, Korthals Altes W, 1994, ``Evaluating communicative planning: a revised design for
    performance research'' European Planning Studies 2 403 ^ 418
Faludi A, Van der Valk A, 1994 Rule and Order: Dutch Planning Doctrine in the Twentieth Century
    (Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht)
Flyvbjerg B, 2002, ``Bringing power to planning research: one researcher's praxis story'' Journal
    of Planning Education and Research 21 357 ^ 366
Forester J, 1989 Planning in the Face of Power (University of California Press, Berkeley, CA)
Foucault M, 1980 The History of Sexuality (Vintage, New York)
Friedmann J, 1992 Empowerment: The Politics of Alternative Development (Blackwell, Oxford)
Friedmann J, 2004, ``Strategic planning and the longer range'' Planning Theory and Practice 5(1)
    49 ^ 67
Friedmann J, Douglas M, 1998, ``Editor's introduction'', in Cities for Citizens Eds M Douglas,
    J Friedmann (John Wiley, Chichester, Sussex) pp 1 ^ 6
Friend J, Hickling H, 1987 Planning under Pressure (Pergamon, Oxford)
Fu«rst D, 2001, ``Regional governance: Ein neues Paradigma der Regionalwissenschaften''
    [Regional governance: a new paradigm of the regional sciences] Raumforschung und
    Raumordnung number 5 ^ 6, 370 ^ 380
Granados Cabezas V, 1995, ``Another methodology for local development? Selling places with
    packaging techniques: a view from the Spanish experience of city strategic planning'' European
    Planning Studies 3 173 ^ 187
Hall P, Pfeiffer U, 2000 Urban Future 21 (Spon, London)
Hart D A, 1976 Strategic Planning in London (Pergamon, Oxford)
Healey P, 1997a, ``An institutionalist approach to spatial planning'', in Making Strategic Spatial
    Plans: Innovation in Europe Eds P Healey, A Khakee, A Motte, B Needham (UCL Press,
    London) pp 21 ^ 36
Healey P, 1997b Collaborative Planning: Shaping Places in Fragmented Societies (Macmillan,
    London)
Healey P, 2004, ``The treatment of space and place in the new strategic spatial planning in Europe''
    International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 28 45 ^ 67
Healey P, Khakee A, Motte A, Needham B, 1997 Making Strategic Spatial Plans. Innovation in
    Europe (UCL Press, London)
Hillier J, 2002 Shadows of Power (Routledge, London)
Innes J, 1994 Planning Through Consensus-Building: A New View of the Comprehensive Planning
    Ideal Institute of Urban and Regional Development, University of California, Berkeley, CA
Strategic (spatial) planning reexamined                                                           757




Innes J, 1996, ``Planning through consensus-building, a new view of the comprehensive planning
    ideal'' Journal of the American Planning Association 62 460 ^ 472
Kaufman J L, Jacobs H M, 1987, ``A public planning perspective on strategic planning'' Journal
    of the American Planning Association 53 21 ^ 31
Kreukels A, 2000, ``An institutional analysis of strategic spatial planning: the case of federal
    urban policies in Germany'', in The Revival of Strategic Spatial Planning Eds W Salet,
    A Faludi (Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences, Amsterdam) pp 53 ^ 65
Krumholz N, 1982, ``A retrospective view of equity planning, Cleveland, 1969 ^ 1979'' Journal of
    the American Planning Association 48 163 ^ 174
Kunzmann K, 2000, ``Strategic spatial development through information and communication'',
    in The Revival of Strategic Spatial Planning Eds W Salet, A Faludi (Royal Netherlands
    Academy of Arts and Sciences, Amsterdam) pp 259 ^ 265
Kunzmann K, 2001a, ``State planning: a German success story?'' International Planning Studies
    6 153 ^ 166
Kunzmann K, 2001b, ``L'amënagement du territoire en Allemagne: une discipline sans utopias?''
    [Spatial planning in Germany: a discipline without utopia?] Territoires 2020 number 4, 101 ^ 116
Kunzmann K, 2001c, ``The Ruhr in Germany: a laboratory for regional governance'', in The
    Changing Institutional Landscape of Planning Eds L Albrechts, J Alden, A da Rosa Pires
    (Ashgate, Aldershot, Hants) pp 133 ^ 158
Mastop H, 1998, ``National planning: new institutions for integration'', paper for the XII AESOP
    Congress, Aveiro; copy available from the author, Nijmegen School of Management, University
    of Nijmegen
Mastop H, Faludi A, 1997, ``Evaluation of strategic plans: the performance principle'' Environment
    and Planning B: Planning and Design 24 815 ^ 822
Mayer M, 2003, ``The onward sweep of social capital: causes and consequences for understanding
    cities, communities and urban movements'' International Journal of Urban and Regional
    Research 27 110 ^ 132
Mintzberg H, 1994 The Rise and Fall of Strategic Planning (The Free Press, New York)
Mintzberg H, 2002, ``Five Ps for strategy'', in The Strategy Process: Concepts, Contexts, Cases
    Eds H Mintzberg, J Lampel, J B Quinn, S Goshal (Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ)
    pp 3 ^ 9
Mintzberg H, Ahlstrand B, Lampel J, 1998 Strategy Safari: A Guided Tour through the Wilds of
    Strategic Management (The Free Press, New York)
Motte A, 1994, ``Innovation in development plan-making in France 1967 ^ 1993'', in Trends in
    Development Plan-making in European Planning Systems Ed. P Healey, WP 42, Department
    of Town and Country Planning, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, Newcastle upon Tyne,
    pp 90 ^ 103
Newman P, Thornley A, 1996 Urban Planning in Europe (Routledge, London)
Ozbekhan H, 1969,``Towards a general theory of planning'', in Perspective of Planning Ed. E Jantsch
    (OECD, Paris) pp 45 ^ 155
Pascual I, Esteve J, 1997 La estrategia de las ciudades. Planes estratëgicos como instrumento:
    mëtodos, tëchnicias y buenas practices [Strategies of cities. Strategic plans as instruments:
    methods, techniques and good practices] (Diputaciön de Barcelona, Barcelona)
Poister T H, Streib G, 1999, ``Strategic management in the public sector: concepts, models and
    processes'' Public Management and Productivity Review 22 308 ^ 325
Pugliese T, Spaziante A (Eds), 2003 Pianificazione strategica per le citta©: riflessioni dale pratiche
    [Strategic planning by cities: reflections from practice] (F Angeli, Milano)
Quinn J B, 1980 Strategies for Change: Logical Incrementalism (Down Jones ^ Irwin,
    Homewood, IL)
Sager T, 1994 Communicative Planning Theory (Avebury, Aldershot, Hants)
Salet W, Faludi A (Eds), 2000, ``Three approaches to strategic planning'', in The Revival of Strategic
    Spatial Planning (Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences, Amsterdam) pp 1 ^ 10
Sandercock L, 1998 Towards Cosmopolis. Planning for Multicultural Cities (John Wiley, Chichester,
    Sussex)
Scharpf F W, Schnabel F, 1978, ``Durchsetzungsprobleme der Raumordnung im o«ffentlichen
    Sektor'' [Performance problems of spatial planning in the public sector] Informationen zur
    Raumentwicklung 1 19 ^ 28
Scho«n D, 1984 The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action (Avebury, Aldershot,
    Hants)
Secchi B, 1986, ``Una nuova forma di piano'' [A new form of play] Urbanistica 82 6 ^ 13
758                                                                                    L Albrechts




Van den Broeck J, 1987, ``Structuurplanning in praktijk: werken op drie sporen'' [Structure planning
   in practice: workings on three tracks] Ruimtelijke Planning ll A2C 53 ^ 119
Van den Broeck J, 1996, ``Pursuit of a collective urban pact between partners'', paper for the
   31st IsoCaRP International Congress, Sydney, September; copy available from the author,
   Department of Architecture, Urban and Regional Planning, Catholic University of Leuven,
   Leuven
Van den Broeck J, 2001, ``Informal arenas and policy agreements changing institutional capacity'',
   paper for the First World Planning School Congress, Shanghai; copy available from the author,
   Department of Architecture, Urban and Regional Planning, Catholic University of Leuven,
   Leuven
Webster, 1970 Webster's Seventh New Collegiate Dictionary (Merriam-Webster, Springfield, MA)
Weeks J, 1993, ``Rediscovering values'', in Principled Positions. Postmodernism and the Rediscovery
   of Value Ed. J Squires (Lawrence and Wishart, London) pp 189 ^ 211
Wilkinson D, Appelbee E, 1999 Implementing Holistic Government (Policy Press, Bristol)




                                                 ß 2004 a Pion publication printed in Great Britain
