[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: journal/M14-healey-2009-in-search-of-the-strategic-in-spatial-strategy-making-10.1080-14649350903417191.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Title:           355943 439..457
Creator:         3B2 Total Publishing System 7.51a/W
Producer:        iText 4.2.0 by 1T3XT
CreationDate:    Tue Dec 15 16:48:20 2009 WIB
ModDate:         Sun Oct 12 05:02:06 2014 WIB
Custom Metadata: no
Metadata Stream: yes
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            none
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           20
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       496 x 709 pts
Page rot:        0
File size:       203391 bytes
Optimized:       no
PDF version:     1.4
[Extracted Text]
This article was downloaded by: [The University Of Melbourne Libraries]
On: 11 October 2014, At: 15:02
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK



                                  Planning Theory & Practice
                                  Publication details, including instructions for authors and
                                  subscription information:
                                  http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rptp20

                                  In Search of the “Strategic” in Spatial
                                  Strategy Making
                                                 a
                                  Patsy Healey
                                  a
                                   Global Urbanism Research Unit , School of Architecture, Planning
                                  and Landscape, Newcastle University , Newcastle, UK
                                  Published online: 07 Jan 2010.




To cite this article: Patsy Healey (2009) In Search of the “Strategic” in Spatial Strategy Making ,
Planning Theory & Practice, 10:4, 439-457, DOI: 10.1080/14649350903417191

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14649350903417191



PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions
                                                                                 Planning Theory & Practice, Vol. 10, No. 4, 439–457, December 2009




                                                                                 In Search of the “Strategic” in Spatial
                                                                                 Strategy Making1
                                                                                 PATSY HEALEY
                                                                                 Global Urbanism Research Unit, School of Architecture, Planning and Landscape, Newcastle University,




Downloaded by [The University Of Melbourne Libraries] at 15:02 11 October 2014
                                                                                 Newcastle, UK




                                                                                 ABSTRACT In recent years, city governments and other entities concerned with urban futures
                                                                                 have been exhorted to produce spatial strategies, indicating how their areas might develop in the
                                                                                 future. But many of the resultant strategies do little “strategic work” in the sense of shaping future
                                                                                 development trajectories. This paper reviews the meaning of “strategic work” in terms of mobilising
                                                                                 attention to an urban area as a whole, and influencing the way that multiple actors involved in
                                                                                 urban development shape their interventions. It emphasises the key judgements which those
                                                                                 involved in promoting such strategic work have to make and discusses how the capacity for making
                                                                                 such judgements may be cultivated among individuals, groups, and the wider political community
                                                                                 involved in urban governance.

                                                                                 Keywords: Spatial planning; practical judgement; strategy making; public realm; planning theory




                                                                                 Spatial Strategy Making in Complex Urban Contexts
                                                                                 During the 1990s and 2000s, there has been a wave of energetic effort in producing spatial
                                                                                 strategies for city regions and metropolitan areas. This effort has been particularly evident
                                                                                 in Europe,2 but is also to be found in the USA (Wheeler, 2002), and in other parts of the
                                                                                 world. Making such strategies, often equated with the production of some kind of
                                                                                 document and visualisation, has been an important area of planning activity throughout
                                                                                 the twentieth century (Ward, 2002). Advocates of strategy making stress its ability to locate
                                                                                 specific interventions aimed at improving urban environments in a wider context, and its
                                                                                 capacity to enhance the identity of an urban area. Their concerns include achieving greater
                                                                                 national and international visibility for their locales; co-ordinating project initiatives;
                                                                                 connecting interventions in different parts of an urban area, often in different jurisdictions;
                                                                                 linking development locations to major infrastructure investments, thereby reducing
                                                                                 spatial injustices; promoting economic opportunities; limiting threats to environmental
                                                                                 balances; and working out which aspects of the past to conserve.
                                                                                    All kinds of planning instruments have evolved to give regulatory and political strength
                                                                                 to such spatial strategies. It is often assumed that these instruments, for example, general
                                                                                 regulatory plans (as in southern Europe and parts of Latin America), structure plans (as in
                                                                                 north-west Europe), spatial development strategies (as promoted in the European Spatial
                                                                                 Development Perspective (CSD, 1999)), schema directeur (in France), and comprehensive
                                                                                 plans (USA), are effective carriers of such strategies. Funding bodies, such as the EU, the
                                                                                 Correspondence Address: Patsy Healey, Global Urbanism Research Unit, School of Architecture, Planning and Landscape,
                                                                                 Newcastle University, Newcastle, UK. Email: Patsy.healey@ncl.ac.uk

                                                                                 1464-9357 Print/1470-000X On-line/09/040439-19 q 2009 Taylor & Francis
                                                                                 DOI: 10.1080/14649350903417191
                                                                                 440   P. Healey

                                                                                 international aid agencies, and many higher tier government funding programmes, have
                                                                                 also encouraged the production of strategies and visions. Ideas promoted in the field of
                                                                                 public management have been used by funders partly to control how their funds are used,
                                                                                 but also to encourage the setting of project proposals by applicants in the context of wider
                                                                                 programmes of intervention, so funders can assess the “value-added” of their aid
                                                                                 contribution (Ferlie et al. 1996). One consequence has been that a lot of “strategies” have
                                                                                 been produced by agencies involved in urban governance and urban development.
                                                                                 However, only some of these actually produce significant effects other than ensuring
                                                                                 formal compliance in order to attract funds or meet regulatory requirements. Some
                                                                                 strategy statements may serve political purposes through a rhetorical flourish which




Downloaded by [The University Of Melbourne Libraries] at 15:02 11 October 2014
                                                                                 displays the promises of a mayor or local regime. Other so-called strategies may merely
                                                                                 record already well-established directions.
                                                                                    Only some of these strategies are “strategic” in the sense understood by Albrechts:
                                                                                       Strategic planning is selective and oriented to issues that really matter. As it is
                                                                                       impossible to do everything that needs to be done, “strategic” implies that
                                                                                       some decisions and actions are considered more important than others and that
                                                                                       much of the process lies in making the tough decisions about what is most
                                                                                       important for the purpose of producing fair, structural responses to problems,
                                                                                       challenges, aspirations, and diversity. (Albrechts, 2004, pp. 751– 752)
                                                                                    Here, Albrechts is referring both to a general quality of planning work and to planning
                                                                                 activity focused on a broad phenomenon such as a city region or larger territory. As
                                                                                 Kitchen (2007) argues, all planning work has a strategic dimension in the sense that a wide
                                                                                 range of considerations are “integrated” into the judgements made about any specific
                                                                                 intervention. What distinguishes the spatial strategy-making referred to here is the
                                                                                 concern to shape the dynamics through which larger urban regions evolve. In such
                                                                                 situations, the intellectual challenge is to imagine the “entity” in question (what and
                                                                                 where is our “city”, see Healey, 2004a; Vigar et al., 2005), its connectivities and the relation
                                                                                 between its parts (people and groups, places and neighbourhoods) and the “whole”
                                                                                 (the city, or urban region understood as an entity), and the relations with wider systems
                                                                                 which flow through such an area. Such strategic initiatives also have to face the political
                                                                                 challenge of mobilising attention to, and creating a “public” around, such an entity
                                                                                 (Gualini, 2004; Healey, 2007).
                                                                                    How then, as analysts, can we distinguish efforts in spatial strategy making focused on
                                                                                 large urban areas which are “strategic” in their intentions and in their actual and potential
                                                                                 consequences? As practitioners, how can we tell when and how to do such “strategic”
                                                                                 work and how can we learn how to do it? In this paper, I define “strategic work” in the
                                                                                 planning field as both integrative and as geared to efforts to change direction, to open
                                                                                 up new possibilities and potentials, and to move away from previous positions. Much
                                                                                 planning work involves maintaining, managing and conserving local environments,
                                                                                 within relatively stable parameters. Spatial strategy making, as understood by Albrechts, is
                                                                                 explicitly transformative governance work. It is aimed at responding to changing
                                                                                 contextual parameters and at making a contribution to those parameters, as an enduring
                                                                                 piece of public infrastructure, in the manner of famous plans such as Patrick
                                                                                 Abercrombie’s plan for Greater London (1944) and Daniel Burnham’s Chicago Plan of
                                                                                 1909 (Ward, 2002). It is in this sense that spatial strategies have a “structuring” dimension.
                                                                                    In this paper, I focus in particular on the critical judgements that those involved in such
                                                                                 transformative strategy making face, and on the practical “art” of making such
                                                                                 judgements (Vickers, 1965). These judgements involve technical expertise and
                                                                                                                                               In search of the “strategic”   441

                                                                                 political astuteness. They combine analytical knowledge and moral considerations. They
                                                                                 demand a broad grasp, a sensitivity to a plurality of issues and concerns, and an
                                                                                 awareness of the detail of experience and of what it takes for a strategic idea to shape the
                                                                                 flow of ongoing activity. Making spatial strategies that get to matter is not an easy
                                                                                 assignment. Such strategies, although sometimes associated with a key politician (as with
                                                                                 Mayor Maragall in Barcelona in the late twentieth century (Marshall, 2004)) or a planner
                                                                                 (such as Abercrombie and Burnham, cited above),3 are rarely the product of the effort of a
                                                                                 single individual. They arise from a collective governance effort and they “work”, in terms
                                                                                 of having effects, because they become embedded in the governance culture of a locality.
                                                                                    This paper, then, is a review essay. It is partly an analysis of what is involved in making




Downloaded by [The University Of Melbourne Libraries] at 15:02 11 October 2014
                                                                                 the judgements involved in spatial strategy making that “gets to matter”. It is also an
                                                                                 exercise in “normative abstraction”, culling from my own research, reading and
                                                                                 experience what seem to me to be critical dimensions of the “art of judgement” relevant to
                                                                                 the activity of making spatial strategies.4 I attempt a kind of bridge between the theorists
                                                                                 of socio-spatial change and the work of acting to generate change, to transform place
                                                                                 qualities and connectivities, in ways which might have the potential to encourage future
                                                                                 benefits to emerge. Before embarking on the review itself, I expand below on the activity of
                                                                                 spatial strategy making in the planning field.

                                                                                 Spatial Strategy Making as an Area of Planning Activity
                                                                                 Along with Albrechts (2004), I understand spatial strategies for large urban complexes as
                                                                                 social products which emerge as an important part of the governance “infrastructure” of
                                                                                 an area. By this I mean that they do “work” by helping to frame and focus the way people
                                                                                 involved in urban development processes and projects come to think and act. By
                                                                                 “governance”, I mean the array of activities and agencies involved in collective action in an
                                                                                 urban area (Cars et al., 2002; Le Galès, 2002).5 Spatial strategies get to “work” by providing
                                                                                 an orientation, or reference frame, which gets shared by many stakeholders in urban
                                                                                 development processes.6 This orientation may be expressed in general principles or in
                                                                                 spatial images such as maps and diagrams. Spatial strategies which get to have
                                                                                 transformative effects accumulate the power to frame discourses and shape action through
                                                                                 their resonance with issues and problems which are causing concern within a political
                                                                                 community, or “polity”,7 and through the persuasive power of their core arguments and
                                                                                 metaphors. If sufficient power is accumulated to give momentum to these strategic
                                                                                 orientations, then the framing ideas may travel across significant institutional sites of
                                                                                 urban and regional governance, to enrol others with the power to invent, invest and
                                                                                 regulate subsequent development. In this way, strategic orientations may come to endure
                                                                                 through time and have consequences in shaping future qualities and potentialities.8
                                                                                    Yet spatial strategy making is no simple activity which can be managed by procedural
                                                                                 formulae. It is “a messy, back-and-forth process, with multiple layers of contestation and
                                                                                 struggle” (Healey, 2007, p. 182). This “back and forth” process provides a good illustration
                                                                                 of what policy analyst John Kingdon (2003) means when he refers to streams of policy
                                                                                 “problems” and “solutions” jostling together, with clear “policies” emerging when a
                                                                                 solution and a problem become attached. In the diffused governance landscapes which
                                                                                 have emerged in western Europe in recent years, and which are common in metropolitan
                                                                                 areas where urban relations stretch across administrative jurisdictions in complex ways,9
                                                                                 spatial strategy making may involve something more than selecting what are the “critical”
                                                                                 problems and identifying good ways of addressing them. It may also involve searching out
                                                                                 and creating a political community which identifies with the urban complex in question.10
                                                                                 442   P. Healey

                                                                                    Strategies that make a difference, then, inherently transform, though such changes may
                                                                                 emerge slowly over time and in unpredictable ways.11 Strategies encourage a momentum
                                                                                 towards some directions rather than others. In the public sphere, they are thus political
                                                                                 acts, challenging established power dynamics and mobilising energy to move in different
                                                                                 directions, although there are all kinds of ways in which such strategies are grounded in
                                                                                 formal political jurisdictions. Because such strategies are social products formed to do
                                                                                 governance work, they raise difficult political questions about their legitimacy and
                                                                                 accountability. For those with expertise in their field, the associated technical knowledge
                                                                                 and values draw them into the political struggle over ideas and directions. These values
                                                                                 are not merely about making sure that some consideration is given to critical connections




Downloaded by [The University Of Melbourne Libraries] at 15:02 11 October 2014
                                                                                 and relations in and beyond an urban area, that is to a systematic consideration of
                                                                                 connectivities and the relations between “parts” and “wholes” (Churchman, 1979). Rather,
                                                                                 planning expertise is also associated with a concern for social and environmental well
                                                                                 being, or “flourishing” (Friedmann, 2002, 2008). Where experts and others committed to
                                                                                 this project become involved in spatial strategy making, they will be faced not only with
                                                                                 the pressure to keep an open, “comprehensive” orientation to complex interrelations
                                                                                 which co-exist in the urban area in question (Hoch, 2007). They will also have a specific
                                                                                 moral position about why certain strategic directions should be encouraged and others
                                                                                 closed off. They become advocates of particular kinds of opportunity for future
                                                                                 generations. They may add to the “stream” of problems and solutions in search of one
                                                                                 another, and to what I have earlier called the “argumentative jumble” which has to be
                                                                                 sorted through by those wishing to affect the type of spatial strategy making that has the
                                                                                 potential to make a difference (Healey, 2006). Spatial strategy-making efforts thus have
                                                                                 the potential to make a difference beyond framing the way many parties think about the
                                                                                 future development of an urban complex. Such efforts also contribute to enlarging public
                                                                                 debate about urban futures.
                                                                                    What, then, does “doing” such transformative strategic work involve? Drawing on my
                                                                                 earlier work on the nature of strategic spatial planning (Healey, 2007), I emphasise four
                                                                                 interacting dimensions (see Figure 1). The first centres on whether, why and how to
                                                                                 mobilise attention to an urban complex, understood as a whole in some way. The second
                                                                                 emphasises what is at stake, for whom and where, in the socio-spatial complex of an urban
                                                                                 area, and how the power to act in relation to these stakes is or could be distributed.
                                                                                 The third concerns the mobilisation and enrichment of the knowledge resources available
                                                                                 to strategy-making work, and the fourth centres on how strategic ideas are created, as key
                                                                                 framing concepts and projects with the power to shape future directions and actions.




                                                                                                       Figure 1. Dimensions of spatial strategy making.
                                                                                                                                               In search of the “strategic”   443

                                                                                 The Momentum for Spatial Strategy-Making Initiatives
                                                                                 Despite the elision in popular perceptions between planning work and the widespread
                                                                                 presence of city plans, transformative spatial strategies in the sense outlined here are not
                                                                                 necessarily appropriate for every urban area. The making of a city plan may merely
                                                                                 consolidate well-established ideas and practices as a basis for exercising formal legal
                                                                                 powers, such as those enabling site assembly and land-use regulation. Any wider strategy
                                                                                 may be left as implicit, or carried in the flow of decisions about small-scale changes, or
                                                                                 emerge from the way in which larger place transformation projects are designed and
                                                                                 developed. Explicit strategy-making work that is more than procedural compliance and
                                                                                 political rhetoric emerges in place development and management work when some




Downloaded by [The University Of Melbourne Libraries] at 15:02 11 October 2014
                                                                                 parties become frustrated by established ideas, regulatory practices and the design and
                                                                                 decision making around major projects. For example, rising concerns about noise and air
                                                                                 pollution around large airports may force changes in spatial strategies. In the Amsterdam
                                                                                 area, locations designated for development near Schiphol international airport had to be
                                                                                 re-designated as open areas when regulations governing noise pollution were tightened
                                                                                 (Healey, 2007). Or some particular interests may become frustrated about the lack of
                                                                                 attention to the significance of a major emerging challenge, such as addressing the
                                                                                 multiple implications of climate change prognoses or re-configuring transport
                                                                                 infrastructures. Salet and Thornley (2007) argue that the momentum for spatial strategy
                                                                                 making in metropolitan areas has been driven in western European cities especially by
                                                                                 urban and regional transport agencies. Alternatively, they may result from a sense of
                                                                                 fragmented and overlapping initiatives, which, instead of producing creative synergies,
                                                                                 undermine each other in a destructive manner.12
                                                                                    A key area of judgment relates, then, to an assessment of the institutional moment, or
                                                                                 “opportunity structure” (Tarrow, 1994), for spatial strategy making. This leads spatial
                                                                                 strategy makers to consider such questions as: what is the momentum for an explicit
                                                                                 spatial strategy-making initiative? What forces and actors are driving this? What is the
                                                                                 scope for the transformation of discourses and practices through such an initiative? How
                                                                                 strong is the momentum? Can it be strengthened and what might weaken it? What kind of
                                                                                 process is already underway, what might evolve and what could be created? What seems
                                                                                 to be at stake and around which issues will critical judgements have to be made? How are
                                                                                 the initiators situated in relation to this momentum, and how am “I” as an actor in such a
                                                                                 process situated, in terms of role, skills, potential to exert influence and legitimacy?
                                                                                    On the face of it, the first judgemental step in undertaking strategy making would seem
                                                                                 to be defining the “opportunity structure” for such an activity, and assessing whether it is
                                                                                 likely to be “worth the effort”. In the days when spatial strategy making was conceived as
                                                                                 a linear process, with each step following consequentially on the one before, much of the
                                                                                 planning literature assumed not just that spatial strategy-making initiatives started with
                                                                                 such a step, but that this step was taken by those in formal political positions, charged with
                                                                                 the responsibility for defining public values and concerns for the wider polity (Davidoff &
                                                                                 Reiner, 1962). “Pattern books” for decision processes and “best practice” manuals also
                                                                                 seem to offer ways of reducing the scope for judgements that actors within strategic
                                                                                 planning processes have to make. But the experience of practice warns against this, and
                                                                                 intellectual resources in theory and philosophy suggest that leaning on such guides may
                                                                                 distort the capacity for judging what is going on and what is at stake in a specific context.13
                                                                                    Experientially, those involved in strategy making in the public domain know that the
                                                                                 “opportunity structure” is not a static phenomenon, but a complex of relations that shifts
                                                                                 and changes through time. Nor is it something that can be easily known; instead,
                                                                                 444   P. Healey

                                                                                 knowledge about it develops through experience. An opportunity structure is not a clearly
                                                                                 delineated and contained “action space”. It grows and expands, or contracts and fades
                                                                                 away, in part through the momentum developed as the practice itself gets underway, as
                                                                                 transformative energy enlarges the initial “cracks” for change to allow a more substantial
                                                                                 momentum to develop and new trajectories to be cultivated. Doubts and dilemmas are in
                                                                                 continual play, as strategy-making practices are challenged and critiqued by those
                                                                                 immediately involved, those potentially affected, and the wider polity. As a spatial
                                                                                 strategy evolves, key actors in such practices may therefore find themselves “called to
                                                                                 judgement” about whether and how to proceed at all kinds of times and institutional
                                                                                 places. They learn from coming to understand the specificities and potentialities of




Downloaded by [The University Of Melbourne Libraries] at 15:02 11 October 2014
                                                                                 the context.
                                                                                    Theory too has caught up with this dynamic, continually evolving quality of
                                                                                 governance practices (Gualini, 2004; Briggs, 2008). In traditional public administration it
                                                                                 was assumed that governance activity occurred, or should occur, according to the laws
                                                                                 and procedures laid down by legislatures. It was expected to take place in the formal
                                                                                 arenas specified for government activity, and to be conducted by personnel given
                                                                                 formal positions in these procedures and arenas. Judgements were anticipated via formal
                                                                                 processes—the council chamber vote, the appeal to law and the arbitrating judge. But
                                                                                 judicial “balancing” in relation to formal law has difficulty when it comes to doing the
                                                                                 integrative intellectual work which is involved in spatial strategy making. In the 1960s an
                                                                                 alternative, supposedly more “scientific” process was proposed. This encouraged strategy
                                                                                 makers to follow a sequential, methodological process in such “analysis”, mirroring what
                                                                                 was seen to be a “scientific method” of arriving at a strategy (Hillier & Healey, 2008). These
                                                                                 days, a more sociological view prevails, which stresses the power of “agency” in
                                                                                 interaction with broader forces (see Hajer & Wagenaar, 2003; Healey, 2006). This examines
                                                                                 the way informal relations and networks create the practices through which the formal
                                                                                 procedures are enacted. And a more political view underlines the power struggles which
                                                                                 are played out in these practices, as actors struggle with each other, and as dynamic
                                                                                 struggles develop between the constraints of wider forces as experienced in the specifics of
                                                                                 a situation, and the resisting and inventive power of specific constellations of actors to
                                                                                 challenge and change these forces (Flyvbjerg, 1998; Healey, 2007). These developments in
                                                                                 theorising planning and policy-making activity are thus positioned in a large field of
                                                                                 recent social scientific discussion which has been searching for productive ways of
                                                                                 understanding the complex interactions of structuring dynamics and agency effort.14
                                                                                 These “in-between” contributions underline the importance of grasping the unique
                                                                                 situatedness of particular instances of practice, rather than reading instances through the
                                                                                 generalised lenses of procedural rules, best practice manuals, or of general structural
                                                                                 forces. Methodologically, such a perspective underlines the value of the “thick”
                                                                                 descriptions of “longitudinal” case studies.15
                                                                                    But none of this takes away the intensely political and ethical challenge of actually
                                                                                 making judgements about spatial strategies for urban areas in the public domain.
                                                                                 However broad the search for knowledge to ground judgements, and however shrewd
                                                                                 and sensitive the understanding of institutional dynamics, judgements are always made
                                                                                 in the context of limited knowledge and understanding, and of moral hazard. Though
                                                                                 those involved may carefully aim to put prior conceptions and biases to one side, their
                                                                                 judgements are nonetheless always shaped by implicit assumptions that somehow did not
                                                                                 surface or were pushed aside. However hard those involved try to keep in play a rich and
                                                                                 multi-dimensional conception of urban dynamics when shaping a strategy, their
                                                                                 assumptions and their framing of what is at stake and what is strategic are inherently
                                                                                                                                               In search of the “strategic”   445

                                                                                 selective simplifications. If a strategy has enduring power, it cannot avoid “reductive
                                                                                 effects” on future ways of understanding and acting. Spatial strategy making involves
                                                                                 exercising the power to select and simplify (Albrechts, 2004; Healey, 2007). It involves
                                                                                 taking risks, the consequences of which can be thought about, but cannot be known
                                                                                 (Hillier, 2008). It is this frightening prospect which so often pulls actors back to easier
                                                                                 short-term compromises, or encourages them to hand over the judgements to someone
                                                                                 else—another tier of government perhaps, or to the courts, and sometimes to citizens in
                                                                                 referenda and other forms of consultation. Those who argue in a specific situation for
                                                                                 undertaking an effort in transformative spatial strategy making need to be prepared and
                                                                                 able to justify such a step, in terms of both why “going on as usual” will not suffice, and




Downloaded by [The University Of Melbourne Libraries] at 15:02 11 October 2014
                                                                                 where momentum already exists which could be harnessed towards a new strategic
                                                                                 orientation. They need to be able to clarify how the urban area in general could benefit,
                                                                                 and how the “parts”—people, places and connectivities—may be affected.


                                                                                 Situating and Scoping
                                                                                 Those who take a central role in deliberate initiatives in spatial strategy making are
                                                                                 sometimes portrayed as “authors” creating a “script” for others to enact, or as “artists”
                                                                                 creating an idea of the future to inspire others (Beauregard, 1998). This suggests that they
                                                                                 are somehow different from their readers and viewers, that they are producers of a
                                                                                 strategy, not consumers. This presents such strategy makers as located in a different place
                                                                                 from those who are to be influenced, maybe as a small and highly centralised decision-
                                                                                 making elite governing the rest of us. Or it assumes that strategy makers can be situated as
                                                                                 outside experts, looking in on the challenges the rest of us face as we create our urban
                                                                                 futures. Positioning strategy makers in this way makes little sense in situations where
                                                                                 governance activity is complexly divided up into sectors and levels of attention, diffused
                                                                                 among diverse arenas and relations between state, economy and civil society, and
                                                                                 continually contested. These days, those involved in spatial strategy making are more
                                                                                 usually located within the complexities they are seeking to shape, “inside” the politics
                                                                                 they are seeking to influence (Healey, 2007). As a former planning director has noted,
                                                                                 “planning is a collective art . . . it is an evolving set of dreams, not one person’s dreams”.16
                                                                                 Viewed in this way, an initiative in spatial strategy making involves some kind of
                                                                                 collective effort to mobilise attention to an urban area as a whole. Such initiatives are likely
                                                                                 to be responding to matters which have created some public concern, and the work
                                                                                 involved in them may itself reshape and generate the agendas of a polity.
                                                                                    Developing an idea of the “opportunity structure” for explicit spatial strategy making as
                                                                                 discussed above is a necessary step in situating such an effort. But much more is needed to
                                                                                 situate and scope practice adequately. One aspect of this relates to the identity of the
                                                                                 “strategy makers”. Formally, they could be the leaders and advisers of a new political
                                                                                 regime, as was the case in the 1970s in Portland, Oregon (Abbott, 2001) or Barcelona
                                                                                 (Marshall, 2004). They could be consultants, hired by municipalities or some other multi-
                                                                                 agency partnership to prepare a strategy, as has become common in the UK in recent years.
                                                                                 They could be the strategic sections of a municipal planning department or a local elite
                                                                                 business group.17 Whatever their starting position, the assumptions made about their
                                                                                 institutional identity by spatial strategy makers may have a critical impact on how an
                                                                                 initiative unfolds. Who are the “we”, as initiators? What is “our” formal legitimacy and
                                                                                 what other kinds of legitimacy may buttress our efforts? How are “we” related to others
                                                                                 who are promoting ideas about urban futures, or deploying resources which result in
                                                                                 place development? What opportunities are available to us to influence events and how
                                                                                 446   P. Healey

                                                                                 could we get nearer to other important levers in the process? It is often only during the
                                                                                 process of strategy making that those engaged in spatial strategy making become aware of
                                                                                 the nature and potentialities of their identity. In Amsterdam, for example, the city council
                                                                                 planners involved in metropolitan initiatives realised that they had to change the
                                                                                 domineering image they had acquired if they were to achieve a productive collaboration
                                                                                 with other municipalities. In the Cambridge area of the UK, the local elite lobby
                                                                                 group involved in promoting a spatial strategy initiative had to recognise that they needed
                                                                                 to connect to the local planning machinery in order to have influence over the power to
                                                                                 regulate land use and development (Healey, 2007). The impact of the assumptions that
                                                                                 people make at the start of a process affects how subsequent activities are framed. But it




Downloaded by [The University Of Melbourne Libraries] at 15:02 11 October 2014
                                                                                 also influences how the initiators present themselves to others, and how this may affect the
                                                                                 responses their work generates. A key area, then, where judgement needs to be exercised
                                                                                 is the way in which those involved at the centre of a strategy-making initiative present
                                                                                 their identities, both to themselves and to others, and how they keep this under review.
                                                                                    A second aspect relates to the position of strategy makers in a governance context.
                                                                                 Where are they situated? Within which landscapes of power dynamics? Within which
                                                                                 debates and arguments? Answering these questions involves making some kind of
                                                                                 institutional audit of the agency field. Which are the key arenas where strategic ideas
                                                                                 about place development are already evolving? How are they related to each other, and to
                                                                                 the levers that link to key powers, such as investment resources of various kinds and the
                                                                                 power to regulate land use and development? Such assessments might lead to judgements
                                                                                 about who should be involved in early-stage discussions, and who should be sought out
                                                                                 later; about which networks to work with, and when; and about the ways of establishing
                                                                                 new networks to create more mobilisation power around a strategic initiative.
                                                                                 The judgements made here help to build connections between ideas about critical
                                                                                 interventions, the impacts they may have, and the actions needed to realise them.
                                                                                    A third aspect relates to the power of any kind of governance effort to shape ongoing
                                                                                 place dynamics. This emphasises the importance for spatial strategy making of a rich,
                                                                                 multi-dimensional understanding of urban development dynamics and trajectories. This
                                                                                 means much more than just developing an evidence base, to use a term currently made
                                                                                 fashionable in public policy in the UK (Davoudi, 2006). It involves having some
                                                                                 understanding of the material and cultural history of an urban area, of how this shapes
                                                                                 conceptions of what trajectories are desirable and possible, and frames what is seen to be
                                                                                 at stake or at issue. Such understanding feeds judgements about the extent to which a
                                                                                 strategy aims to have resonance with, and realise the potential of, emergent trajectories
                                                                                 which can be identified as having an endogenous dynamic (locally based political energy).
                                                                                 It also allows planners to estimate how far a particular strategy may have an intention to
                                                                                 roll out another trajectory, derived exogenously in, around and over pre-existing cultures
                                                                                 and practices (externally based political energy). Both possibilities involve complex
                                                                                 assessments of the relative power of a particular strategy-making initiative in relation to
                                                                                 ongoing urban dynamics, of the power of collective action to shape these and of the
                                                                                 institutional dynamics of that power.
                                                                                    Attention to these aspects feeds judgements about what is at stake behind a particular
                                                                                 spatial strategy-making initiative. What is at issue? For whom is it an issue? What are
                                                                                 current conflicts and struggles about? Who are the critical “stakeholders” active now?
                                                                                 Who else could be persuaded to become an active stakeholder? What are the critical arenas
                                                                                 and responsibilities in the institutional terrain in which the initiative exists? How far away
                                                                                 is the initiative from these, and what could be done (and where and when) to reduce the
                                                                                 distances which limit influence? What might need to be done to mobilise more attention to
                                                                                                                                              In search of the “strategic”   447

                                                                                 an initiative and to build new networks and arenas to refocus governance attention more
                                                                                 emphatically on urban area development agendas?
                                                                                   Initiatives in spatial strategy making are thus “inside politics”. They also involve the
                                                                                 exercise of the craft of “practical politics”, shaping agendas and extending influence,
                                                                                 enhancing attention to some issues and thereby pulling attention away from others
                                                                                 (Albrechts, 2001). All those involved in spatial strategy making that aims to shape urban
                                                                                 development futures are therefore placed in morally complex situations. Playing the game
                                                                                 of practical politics according to rules which focus merely on extending power and
                                                                                 influence is hardly a sufficient basis for the craft of such a practice (Albrechts, 2003).
                                                                                 Instead, spatial strategy making demands a good awareness of how collective action




Downloaded by [The University Of Melbourne Libraries] at 15:02 11 October 2014
                                                                                 operates as a dimension of urban development dynamics. It needs a holistic or
                                                                                 comprehensive consciousness that can focus on the way relations need to be integrated
                                                                                 into a strategy. It also demands an expansive moral sensibility, capable of relating specific
                                                                                 questions about who and what might gain and lose in such a process to wider issues of
                                                                                 social and environmental well being.
                                                                                   It is here that all kinds of resources can help to feed the imagination of strategy makers.
                                                                                 One is, of course, the social science literature on urban and regional dynamics, with its
                                                                                 interweaving of research about particular phenomena and its debates about how to
                                                                                 conceptualise the dimensions of place dynamics and how to identify particular
                                                                                 cause-effect relations. This body of theory and research offers not foundations which
                                                                                 can be leaned on as an alternative to first-hand thinking about a specific situation, but
                                                                                 inspirations for enlarging the imagination which strategy makers bring to their struggle to
                                                                                 grasp what is going on and what is at stake in a particular situation. But there are other
                                                                                 resources too. Behind seeking out good practice examples from elsewhere, something
                                                                                 many practitioners do, is a deeper question about “how do we go about the difficult task
                                                                                 we face here and now?” When considering an example, practitioners want to know
                                                                                 “how did they do it there?” Experiential accounts (autobiographies) of planners (and
                                                                                 others) about how they went about their work are particularly valuable as aids to learning
                                                                                 the “craft” of spatial strategy making (Forester, 1999; Kitchen, 1997; Krumholz & Forester,
                                                                                 1990). These accounts convey the difficulties of making situated judgements in ways that
                                                                                 highlight how much is unknown and “at risk” in spatial strategy-making work. Such
                                                                                 accounts emphasise the learning process through which any strategy making initiative
                                                                                 will develop, drawing knowledge from failures as well as successes. But this consolidated
                                                                                 resource—“book knowledge” as we might term it—is not the only source which can or
                                                                                 should feed strategic imagination.


                                                                                 Enlarging Perspectives and Knowledgeability
                                                                                 In the past, it was often thought that the work of spatial strategy making required
                                                                                 planning expertise in its most scientific form. The “experts”, in this conception, were those
                                                                                 skilled in analysis and systematic research, well-informed by the scientific literature on
                                                                                 urban and regional analysis. Yet, in the conception of spatial strategy making portrayed
                                                                                 here, the “art” becomes a practice that does not rely too much on one particular field of
                                                                                 systematised knowledge or area of expertise. Urban development dynamics are too
                                                                                 complex to be grasped through work in any single discipline. Knowledge from urban and
                                                                                 regional science, engineering, the physical and natural sciences, architecture and the
                                                                                 humanities can provide inspirational insight. Yet many examples of the dilemmas of
                                                                                 strategic planning in practice highlight difficulties which arise as these different fields of
                                                                                 expertise, with their particular intellectual and practice cultures, encounter each other.
                                                                                 448   P. Healey

                                                                                    But beyond the difficulties of working across disciplinary and professional boundaries,
                                                                                 it is important to recognise the limitations of such systematised knowledge in grasping
                                                                                 what is going on in the particularities of a place. It is here that we find a critical resource in
                                                                                 the experiential knowledge of those who live, work, enjoy themselves, suffer or invest in a
                                                                                 place, those who manage it, argue about it, and get involved in collective action on its
                                                                                 behalf; all activities that underline the particularities and specificities of a place, its
                                                                                 qualities and meanings, and its dynamics. Critical judgements have to be made in spatial
                                                                                 strategy-making initiatives about how to access such expertise, and how to weave this
                                                                                 together with systematised knowledge, which itself is related in complex ways to
                                                                                 experiential understandings (Healey, 2007). In doing so, it may not help to systematise




Downloaded by [The University Of Melbourne Libraries] at 15:02 11 October 2014
                                                                                 experiences, for example through surveys about opinions and issues, as this may well
                                                                                 smooth away the experiential depth out of which clues about what is going on and what is
                                                                                 important may emerge. As in all planning work, spatial strategy makers need to get out
                                                                                 and about in the streets and meeting places of their urban areas. There is no substitute for
                                                                                 becoming “street-wise” as a way of accessing experiential knowledge, or for recognising
                                                                                 that any place has many different streets and spaces of encounter. As Forester (1989)
                                                                                 emphasises, the skills of noticing, listening and learning are critical to accessing this kind
                                                                                 of experiential learning (Kitchen, 2007).
                                                                                    Once the value of recognising multiple sources of knowledge about places and their
                                                                                 development is appreciated, the importance of maintaining an “open-minded” stance
                                                                                 towards what is going on and what is at stake becomes obvious. Single-minded, one-issue
                                                                                 agendas become difficult to justify. Instead, spatial strategy makers learn to anticipate a
                                                                                 plurality of often overlapping and clashing agendas.18 In recognition of the complexity
                                                                                 and diversity of concerns about urban area development that may be asserted (or that
                                                                                 could be held if people were aware of the trajectories that might evolve from the process),
                                                                                 open-mindedness means actively stretching out to access multiple perspectives,
                                                                                 challenging established assumptions and cultivating debate and argument among
                                                                                 different viewpoints (Amin et al., 2000).
                                                                                    There are all kinds of ways of encouraging this capacity (Albrechts, 2004, 2005). Above
                                                                                 all, it demands an expansive open-mindedness, a capacious and flexible imagination, able
                                                                                 to recognise multiple connections between people and places through time. As Hoch
                                                                                 suggests, it is this quality of reaching for a holistic grasp of the situation that informs the
                                                                                 old idea of a “comprehensive” planning approach. Reality, in this model, cannot be
                                                                                 comprehensively trapped, mapped and managed in a single model of an urban “system”
                                                                                 (Hoch, 2007). Instead, an open-minded approach involves searching out all kinds of
                                                                                 “systemic” qualities, that is, locating the connections through which cause-effect relations
                                                                                 may flow to create impacts. It helps to see such systems as open and meandering threads,
                                                                                 with evolving patterns of flow shaped by various driving forces, creating diverse patterns
                                                                                 of nodes and networks, with fuzzy and indistinct margins rather than clear boundaries
                                                                                 containing tightly integrated and bounded sets of relations (Churchman, 1979). Exploring
                                                                                 such dynamics to find out what is at stake and what action possibilities exist to affect the
                                                                                 outcome involves explorative probing as much as precisely structured inquiry, and
                                                                                 imaginative learning as much as the production of “sound evidence”.19 Approached in
                                                                                 this way, spatial strategy making creates a “community of inquiry” around itself, which
                                                                                 draws on and in turn helps to cultivate the overall “intelligence” of a polity (Dewey, 1991).
                                                                                    Many judgements are involved in developing such a “community of inquiry”. What
                                                                                 strands should be followed up first? How should the field of search be widened? How can
                                                                                 areas of inquiry be related to each other? When and how can debate and contestation be
                                                                                 encouraged? How can we prevent less visible strands being lost while others are
                                                                                                                                              In search of the “strategic”   449

                                                                                 vigorously debated? An expansive, pluralistic, holistic imagination becomes a very
                                                                                 valuable resource in making such judgements, especially if this develops within the
                                                                                 community of inquiry. But perhaps the most critical judgement of all in relation to
                                                                                 knowledgeability lies in making decisions about when to stop enlarging and expanding
                                                                                 understanding, in order to get what is at stake back into focus. There can be no hard and
                                                                                 fast rules about how to make such a judgement, no indisputable “reality checks” which
                                                                                 can provide some external “stopping point” for probing inquiry. Instead, those centrally
                                                                                 involved at this stage have to come to a judgement that their understanding of the context,
                                                                                 of what is settled and what remains in doubt and contested, of what is at issue, is “enough
                                                                                 for now”. They must decide what, in the field of doubt and uncertainty, can now be put to




Downloaded by [The University Of Melbourne Libraries] at 15:02 11 October 2014
                                                                                 rest, and determine in which direction the compass, which had seemed to be swinging
                                                                                 wildly, now seems to point.20 Having exercised an expansive, holistic imagination and
                                                                                 keeping this continually in play, those making critical judgements in the public domain
                                                                                 may find it useful to ask: in the circumstances we are in, with the resources and capacities
                                                                                 we have, could we do more to expand our knowledge and, if we did, would this make a
                                                                                 significant difference?21 This centres the quality of such strategic judgement not so much
                                                                                 in the amount of knowledge acquired as in the range and depth of the imaginative,
                                                                                 expansive probing which occurs. This could lead to better judgements about whether it
                                                                                 would make much difference to “know more”, and about the effort that would be needed
                                                                                 to acquire such knowledge.


                                                                                 Framing Selectively
                                                                                 As Albrechts argues, any strategy involves a selective focus. It offers a way through the
                                                                                 morass of issues, ideas, claims and arguments to identify one or more concepts, images
                                                                                 and/or principles which are both meaningful and give direction. Such strategies may be
                                                                                 arrived at by systematic search procedures, such as the construction and probing of
                                                                                 scenarios (Albrechts, 2004, 2005). Alternatively, they may be the result of active
                                                                                 campaigning by groups promoting particular interpretative frames, or they can be reached
                                                                                 via an imaginative leap, or through the creative processes of collaborative encounter.
                                                                                 However they appear, strategies come into existence through an act of recognition in which
                                                                                 they are “summoned up”, “seen”, “named” and “framed” (Healey, 2007, pp. 188-189). They
                                                                                 are “willed” into being. They make sense because they show how specific problems, issues
                                                                                 and concerns can be addressed more effectively when located in a wider frame.
                                                                                    A spatial strategy for an urban area, in this view, combines a holistic sensibility about
                                                                                 urban development dynamics with a politically-shrewd awareness about what is critically
                                                                                 at issue and what could be done. It involves judgements about how far it is possible to
                                                                                 shape these dynamics in a transformative way, and highlights which specific actions
                                                                                 (taken now, or in a future where the parameters of action possibilities can be foreseen with
                                                                                 some confidence) have the potential to make a real difference to what is at issue. It involves
                                                                                 judgements about what to position “frontstage” when it comes to action, and what to leave
                                                                                 “backstage” for the time being (Giddens, 1984; Healey, 2007). The heart of a strategy,
                                                                                 therefore, lies in the way that it frames ideas.
                                                                                    Creating the frame and identifying critical actions are both acts of intense simplification
                                                                                 and selectivity. They are thus acutely political, since simplification inherently involves
                                                                                 reductive discrimination (see above). However hard a strategy-making initiative attempts to
                                                                                 keep multiple dimensions and perspectives “in play”, some inevitably become the
                                                                                 dominant focus as strategy making proceeds. This focus, in turn, evolves into the framework
                                                                                 through which other understandings are attached and interpreted. Framing helps to reduce
                                                                                 450   P. Healey

                                                                                 uncertainties, and to allow people to see and justify action possibilities. Because strategies
                                                                                 simplify how urban development dynamics are understood and how possible future
                                                                                 directions are identified, those who initiate spatial strategy-making efforts carry a burden of
                                                                                 moral responsibility.22 They need to make complex and challenging judgements that go
                                                                                 beyond whether it is possible to inject a strategic orientation into a particular governance
                                                                                 landscape: they must also keep in view the potential consequences of consolidating
                                                                                 governance activity around a strategic direction at a particular moment in time.
                                                                                    However, as stressed earlier, spatial strategy-making processes rarely proceed in a
                                                                                 linear way. Creating a strategic framing concept is a process which evolves interactively
                                                                                 with the work of situating and scoping, and of developing knowledgeability. Sometimes a




Downloaded by [The University Of Melbourne Libraries] at 15:02 11 October 2014
                                                                                 clear strategic frame dominates a strategy-making process from the start. Sometimes it
                                                                                 only appears after action possibilities have emerged from scoping and probing work,
                                                                                 allowing it to be seen as a background to the identification of specific projects and
                                                                                 proposals. Alternatively, it may come into being during an imaginative leap, as a new
                                                                                 possibility comes into view. However it is discovered, framing, as Schon and Rein (1994)
                                                                                 insist, is an integrative, creative process. Strategic frames cannot be arrived at by an
                                                                                 analytic procedure, by aggregating up from “parts to wholes”, as some imagined during
                                                                                 the strategic planning movement of the 1960s (Mintzberg, 1994). Nevertheless, strategy
                                                                                 making involves thinking systemically, by which I mean that it focuses on systems of
                                                                                 relationships, such as those connecting where we live and work, or those surrounding the
                                                                                 dynamic relations of housing markets, or those connecting how we live and our
                                                                                 environmental impacts.
                                                                                    However, an over-reliance on previously developed models of urban systems leads to
                                                                                 reductive simplification, which may bear little relationship to, and have little resonance
                                                                                 with, the complex dynamics and specificities of what is happening in a particular place
                                                                                 and time (Churchman, 1979; Verma, 1998). Planning literature has long recognised this, yet
                                                                                 remains full of proposals for idealised urban forms or models of urban systems, all of
                                                                                 which appear to offer a ready-made, integrated image of a whole system.23 The alternative
                                                                                 to this is to develop strategic frames which embody a sensitivity to the complexity,
                                                                                 plurality and indeterminacy of particular urban development dynamics as they emerge,
                                                                                 and which generate sufficient energy to inspire and direct transformative actions within
                                                                                 those dynamics with the aim of shaping what happens in a place. This inspiring and
                                                                                 directing quality lies as much in the frame as in the selective specification of actions.
                                                                                 The frame allows those involved in shaping their own actions to position their activities in
                                                                                 a wider context, and to develop a way of thinking and valuing which inspires and justifies
                                                                                 what they do. The strategic frame, if widely referred to, then becomes a piece of public
                                                                                 infrastructure, part of the capacity of a particular political community.
                                                                                    It is sometimes argued that strategic frames that have significant effects can only be
                                                                                 created through a process that allows a single designer or design group to create a
                                                                                 synthesis from their efforts in scoping and probing. This may take the form of an image, or
                                                                                 a spatial sketch, or a verbal statement about direction and qualities. Behind this approach
                                                                                 lies the idea that strategic design can only be an individual process. Yet studies of strategy
                                                                                 making suggest that creating frames is as much a social as an individual process
                                                                                 (Vickers, 1965). It involves making syntheses, and demands systemic thinking rather than
                                                                                 analytic thinking. This can happen in collective contexts as well as in individual brains.
                                                                                 Some fear that such collective processes can only arrive at lowest common denominator
                                                                                 compromises. This fear assumes that participants engage in a zero-sum game, playing out
                                                                                 their conflicts of interest. It ignores the creative social learning that can occur in processes
                                                                                 where probing inquiry and exploratory framing occur.
                                                                                                                                                 In search of the “strategic”   451

                                                                                    Strategic frames do not appear fully formed. Frames arise through processes of
                                                                                 collective “sense making” (Forester, 1989), as those involved seek out some kind of
                                                                                 coherence among the issues and understandings as they become aware of them. Frames
                                                                                 may already be lying around in an early state of conception, or in debates surrounding
                                                                                 communities of inquiry, waiting to be summoned up and receive explicit attention.24
                                                                                 In situations where understandings have been very diffuse and fragmented, such
                                                                                 meaning making often gets explored not just through defining alternative designs and
                                                                                 options, but by the use of metaphor and analogy (“What is our situation similar to?”
                                                                                 “What if we think like this?”, “Let us suppose this is the case?”) (Verma, 1998; Weston,
                                                                                 1996). Framing work, like the process of probing the available knowledge about situations




Downloaded by [The University Of Melbourne Libraries] at 15:02 11 October 2014
                                                                                 and issues, requires an expansive yet integrative, pluralistic yet synthetic, collective
                                                                                 imagination. Pursued in this way, efforts at probing and developing strategic frames have
                                                                                 the effect of making participants transform the way they think about their particular
                                                                                 interests and trajectories (Innes & Booher, 1999, 2003).25 Strategic frames which have
                                                                                 transformative power achieve this potential in part by changing how key actors think.26
                                                                                    Because frames that transform are so powerful, making strategic judgements about
                                                                                 them is perhaps the most ethically challenging task in spatial strategy making. Dominant
                                                                                 framing ideas have a tendency to emerge as a process proceeds, though this can create
                                                                                 problems: sometimes one assertive voice may impose a frame which seems superficially
                                                                                 adequate to all involved in the process, yet lacks adequate probing, with the result that
                                                                                 issues that later turn out to be highly significant get relegated to the “back stage” of
                                                                                 attention. It is for this reason that deciding whether to employ a strategic frame becomes
                                                                                 such a key judgement. In some situations it may be enough to focus on a few key actions,
                                                                                 since it may be too difficult (intellectually or politically) to provide an explicit justification
                                                                                 for them even though the compass seems to point quite clearly in their direction. It is only
                                                                                 later on that the strategic frame which lies behind the actions can perhaps be articulated.
                                                                                 Alternatively, a key strategic action may unsettle established frames, creating doubt, and
                                                                                 thus allowing new ideas and actions to emerge. In these cases it may not be helpful to
                                                                                 spend much time producing an inspiring vision. But in other cases, a clear strategic frame
                                                                                 may be exactly what is needed to help people move on and to reduce the incapacity which
                                                                                 often accompanies doubts and uncertainties. In these scenarios, it matters a great deal that
                                                                                 a frame is produced. The precise moment of the strategy-making process when it is
                                                                                 summoned up is also significant, as is the issue of its contents and dimensions.
                                                                                    Arriving at a strategic frame, which many see as the key product of a spatial strategy-
                                                                                 making process, is thus an intellectually challenging, politically risky and morally
                                                                                 demanding task. Yet participants and those who have set up the process are likely to
                                                                                 expect some kind of vision statement or an outline of an overall strategy, especially where
                                                                                 the strategy-making process was designed to resolve doubts and allow people to find a
                                                                                 way forward into the future. Those charged with the task of articulating the “strategy”
                                                                                 may find it helpful to go back to the scoping issues, and ask again what specific
                                                                                 governance work a particular strategic frame will perform, in the context in which it now
                                                                                 sits. Will it inspire, justify or mobilise people? Will it focus significant attention on the
                                                                                 problems, and thus have an effect on both subsequent governance action and urban and
                                                                                 regional dynamics? And are these effects all desirable? Further, what is the implication of
                                                                                 our thinking about these questions for the way a strategy is expressed, both in terms of its
                                                                                 framing conception and its specific actions? What are the relative merits of a visual sketch,
                                                                                 a policy statement, a policy argument, a narrative, an artistic image, an imaginative story, a
                                                                                 geographical map or a computer game in conveying the meaning and implications of the
                                                                                 frame and the selected actions proposed?
                                                                                 452   P. Healey

                                                                                    Above all, articulating a strategic frame for the spatial development of an urban area
                                                                                 demands a synthetic imagination, which recognises that wholes and parts do not relate to
                                                                                 each other mechanically but are instead design ideas, with each inspiring the other
                                                                                 through relational resonance rather than specified links. Strategy making demands both
                                                                                 the ability to see a whole reflected in a part, and the capacity to recognise in the whole the
                                                                                 possibility of parts (Churchman, 1979). Because such syntheses are contestable
                                                                                 simplifications that are nonetheless intended to do actual governance work, strategy
                                                                                 making in the public domain demands a moral sensibility as well as an imaginative
                                                                                 capacity. It requires an ethical awareness not just of what is promoted but of what is left
                                                                                 out, what is pushed to the background, as the selected frame and actions are forced into




Downloaded by [The University Of Melbourne Libraries] at 15:02 11 October 2014
                                                                                 the limelight. In other words, spatial strategy making demands the courage to
                                                                                 step forward, combined with the ability to recognise the provisionality and revisability
                                                                                 of both framing conceptions and actions, and of the underlying assumptions on which
                                                                                 these are based. Some individuals may have a cast of mind which tends towards this
                                                                                 combination of synthetic imagination and ethical reflexivity, and such people often come
                                                                                 to be acknowledged as great planners. But these qualities can also be encouraged in a
                                                                                 polity. Spatial strategy-making work thus both benefits from, and helps to cultivate, a
                                                                                 political culture which can relate specific issues and interventions to wider qualities of the
                                                                                 collective experience of living in urban areas.27


                                                                                 Conclusions
                                                                                 All planning work involves some ability to set specific actions in wider contexts. This, in
                                                                                 turn, involves making explicit connections between current action options and their
                                                                                 potential impacts on people and places in the future, in this place and elsewhere
                                                                                 (Kitchen, 2007; Hoch, 2007). Planners need to maintain a broad awareness of the multiple
                                                                                 dimensions of such wider relations, as these impact on the specifics of the issues at hand.
                                                                                 Following Hoch, I have termed this a holistic or comprehensive sensibility, a faculty
                                                                                 capable of grasping the broader context of a problem whilst selecting specific aspects and
                                                                                 actions to guide current action. If we accept the justification for planning as an activity that
                                                                                 seeks to improve social and environmental wellbeing in a world of diverse peoples who
                                                                                 interconnect in complex ways with place, then such a consciousness needs to be infused
                                                                                 with the ability to sustain open-minded and pluralistic views, while recognising the moral
                                                                                 imperatives to pursue actions that promote just and sustainable outcomes.
                                                                                    In this paper, I have tried to show that engaging in spatial strategy making for urban
                                                                                 areas is a particularly demanding field of planning work. The challenge, though, is not one
                                                                                 of analytical capability, as theorists of the mid twentieth century argued. Nor is it one of
                                                                                 design imagination, as the town and landscape designers who dominated planning in the
                                                                                 early twentieth century suggested. Though both of these capabilities are useful, at the
                                                                                 heart of skilful strategy making of the kind that has the potential to enhance the future
                                                                                 possibilities of an urban area, are four skills. Firstly, spatial strategy making requires a
                                                                                 capacity to know a place in all its complexities, in its collective expressions and relations,
                                                                                 and in the fine grain of its social, environmental, political and physical fabric. Secondly,
                                                                                 it needs an imaginative capacity to see opportunities now which can provide the
                                                                                 momentum for future development and safeguard against the many challenges
                                                                                 to well-being that emerge in contemporary urban life. Thirdly, it necessitates the
                                                                                 intellectual and political courage to engage in synthetic thinking, drawing together
                                                                                 understandings and insights to imagine future trajectories and select specific pathways.
                                                                                 Above all, though, spatial strategy making demands a capacity for judgement which is
                                                                                                                                                        In search of the “strategic”       453

                                                                                 situated within, and sensitive to, the contingencies of particular times and places, rather
                                                                                 than drawing on generalised theories of urban change or accepted methodological
                                                                                 protocols.28
                                                                                    Spatial strategy-making efforts which have transformative and structuring effects on
                                                                                 future directions achieve this by becoming a part of the institutional infrastructure of a
                                                                                 community. They act through their role as a reference frame for those with the resources to
                                                                                 deploy, and over time they come to shape urban futures. However, they are neither a
                                                                                 blueprint for building the future, nor a generalised dream about a utopia to come. Rather,
                                                                                 they reflect a process of trying to tie together elements of the building and dreaming that
                                                                                 constitute part of the ongoing life of a polity. In Table 1, I attempt to distinguish such




Downloaded by [The University Of Melbourne Libraries] at 15:02 11 October 2014
                                                                                 transformative strategy-making efforts from the kind of routine “strategy production”,
                                                                                 which merely responds to some external demand for an urban plan, without any
                                                                                 connection to local momentum which could turn such an exercise into a transformative
                                                                                 frame to shape future directions. However, there is no sharp divide between the two:
                                                                                 routine strategy production may merely follow some procedural rule book or best practice
                                                                                 exemplar to meet compliance requirements, but it can have the modest ambition of
                                                                                 articulating what the policy actually does, reflecting the overall direction that emerges
                                                                                 from the individual actions of those on the ground.29 Such an exercise may help to decide
                                                                                 whether or not there are issues that need more fundamental attention, and, if so, may act
                                                                                 as a starting point for a more transformative effort in spatial strategy making.
                                                                                    However, embarking on the type of spatial strategy making that makes a difference is no
                                                                                 easy enterprise. It is both an art and a craft. It has elements of both scientific analysis and of
                                                                                 design science, but also involves a sensibility that is not cultivated in either. Spatial
                                                                                 strategy making, situated in the public domain and concerned for urban futures, demands
                                                                                 a more historical, anthropological and geographical imagination, capable of grasping the
                                                                                 relations between people and place through time. Rather than procedural pattern books,
                                                                                 strategy makers are perhaps better advised to read accounts, histories and biographies of
                                                                                 those involved in spatial strategy making, to enhance the antennae with which they learn
                                                                                 about the specific challenges they face.30 Spatial strategy making can make a material
                                                                                 contribution to the social and environmental well being of many in an urban area, if
                                                                                 approached with a political, economic and cultural imagination that can grasp the relation
                                                                                 between people and the governance of place, and understand the formation of publics and

                                                                                                        Table 1. Transformative versus responsive strategy making
                                                                                 Dimension of strategy
                                                                                 making                      Transformative strategy making             Responsive strategy making

                                                                                 Mobilise attention          Re-orientate attention to issues which     Express what the current aims, values
                                                                                                             lie behind immediate agendas, where        and directions of our agency seem
                                                                                                             this would highlight neglected oppor-      to be, with respect to shaping urban
                                                                                                             tunities and challenges                    futures
                                                                                 Scope the situation         Identify where the energy for change       Identify what our agency can achieve
                                                                                                             may lie and build coalitions for change
                                                                                                             which expand this energy
                                                                                 Enlarge intelligence        Explore and recast agendas of pro-         Summarise what we seem to know
                                                                                                             blems, issues and potential actions and
                                                                                                             stakes, through accessing multiple
                                                                                                             sources of knowledge
                                                                                 Create frames and           Articulate strategic ideas within which    Find a way to give some kind of explicit
                                                                                 select actions              specific issues and actions can be         expression and coherence to the above
                                                                                                             prioritised and given some justification
                                                                                                             and coherence
                                                                                 454    P. Healey

                                                                                 the qualities of a polity. Further, such strategy making may create an infrastructure for
                                                                                 discussion, generating a public realm asset within which the difficult material and moral
                                                                                 challenges faced by those planning urban areas can be debated as the future unfolds.
                                                                                 If developed with knowledgeability, imaginative skill, courage and ethical sensibility,
                                                                                 spatial strategy-making efforts with transformative ambitions have significant potential to
                                                                                 contribute by enhancing the intelligence and capacity of a polity, and thus improve the
                                                                                 future well being of urban citizens and stakeholders (Dewey, 1991).


                                                                                 Notes




Downloaded by [The University Of Melbourne Libraries] at 15:02 11 October 2014
                                                                                  1. This paper is a development of a version produced for the Liber Amicorum prepared to celebrate the
                                                                                     retirement of Professor Louis Albrechts at the Universiteit Leuven (Van den Broeck & Moulaert, 2008).
                                                                                     I would like to thank the Editor, Heather Campbell and four anonymous referees for helpful and insightful
                                                                                     comments on an earlier version of this paper.
                                                                                  2. See Albrechts et al. (2001, 2003), Fedeli and Gastaldi (2004), Marshall (2004), Motte (2007), Salet and Faludi
                                                                                     (2000), Salet et al. (2003).
                                                                                  3. Ward (2002) notes that it was common in the interwar years for a strategy to be known by the name of
                                                                                     the planner who led the planning team. These days, it is more common for a strategy to be known by its
                                                                                     place name.
                                                                                  4. For the empirical basis of my reflections, see Healey et al. (1997), Vigar et al. (2000), Healey (2007). I have also
                                                                                     benefited greatly from discussions with skilled strategic planners over the years, and learned from my own
                                                                                     experience as a “strategic manager”.
                                                                                  5. The term “governance” is used in several ways in planning literature. For some, it implies a shift from
                                                                                     undertaking collective action primarily through the institutions of formal government and resort to all kinds
                                                                                     of other coalitions, alliances and “partnerships”. My usage is as in the text above.
                                                                                  6. Note that my use of “strategy” here is not related to the Habermasian distinction between strategic and
                                                                                     communicative “rationality” (Habermas, 1984). A strategy in the sense that I use it here could arise through
                                                                                     the exercise of both rationalities, or some hybrid between them.
                                                                                  7. By the term “polity”, I mean a governance “culture” in the sense of the qualities of the political life of some
                                                                                     collectivity with a political identity.
                                                                                  8. These “orientations” are given different terms in the planning literature. The most common term, taken from
                                                                                     the work of Schon and Rein (1994), is a “frame”, or framing set of ideas. This gets linked to the idea of a
                                                                                     “discourse” as used in work on struggles between alternative orientations and in the capacity to transform
                                                                                     them as developed in interpretive policy analysis, drawn from Foucauldian inspiration (see Hajer, 1995).
                                                                                     Faludi uses the term “doctrine”, although he developed this to describe a very strongly developed
                                                                                     conception of the Dutch landscape (Faludi & van der Valk, 1994).
                                                                                  9. See Esping Anderson, 1990; Gualini, 2004, 2006; Jessop, 2002; Le Gales, 2002.
                                                                                 10. This has always been a challenge for those promoting a perspective on urban dynamics which pays attention
                                                                                     to the interplay of programmes and projects across an urban area. See studies in planning history, notably
                                                                                     Ward (2002), Nasr and Volait (2003).
                                                                                 11. I think, therefore, that the difference between my understanding of strategy and that argued recently by
                                                                                     Newman (2008) is very small.
                                                                                 12. Cities which have attracted funding from various national and EU programmes are particularly prone to
                                                                                     such experiences.
                                                                                 13. There is a long tradition in planning thought which emphasises the importance of creatively responding to
                                                                                     specific situations in experimental and exploratory ways, rather than relying on prior models and templates,
                                                                                     see Lindblom (1990), Schon (1983), Forester (1989, 1999).
                                                                                 14. See Giddensian structuration theory, actor-network concepts, the varieties of institutionalist understanding.
                                                                                     In philosophy also, the rediscovery of the USA pragmatic tradition, and also the lessons from European
                                                                                     phenomenology and post-structuralist philosophy, underline the importance of situated practical judgement
                                                                                     within social processes.
                                                                                 15. See Flyvbjerg (2001) and Yanow and Schwartz-Shea (2006) on case study method.
                                                                                 16. Talk by Larry Beasley, UBC, Vancouver, 9 June 2007.
                                                                                 17. See, for example, the cases of Amsterdam and the Cambridge sub-region in Healey (2007), and Salt Lake City
                                                                                     in Briggs (2008). For the role of consultants see Healey (2008).
                                                                                                                                                              In search of the “strategic”        455

                                                                                 18. Here I draw on arguments which promote the positive benefits of discordant, conflicting viewpoints in
                                                                                     resisting tendencies to univocal, monist policy discourses (see, for example, Connolly, 1987, 2005). The
                                                                                     pluralism implied here is about a plurality of values and perspectives, not just a plurality of interests.
                                                                                 19. See Lindblom (1990), Healey (2007), see also Hillier (2007) for a similar conclusion arrived at through
                                                                                     engaging with the poststructuralist theorists of complexity.
                                                                                 20. This image of a “compass” derives from the USA pragmatist writers (see Healey, 2009).
                                                                                 21. This draws on central arguments in the pragmatist tradition, see Thayer (1982).
                                                                                 22. See Campbell (2006) for a discussion of how general values, such as a concern for justice, are enacted in the
                                                                                     making of practical judgements in the planning field.
                                                                                 23. See, for example, the new urbanism ideas (Grant, 2006), and the various ecologically inspired utopias that
                                                                                     have appeared in recent years.




Downloaded by [The University Of Melbourne Libraries] at 15:02 11 October 2014
                                                                                 24. See Dewey (1982) for a very interesting discussion of these processes in an essay on the pattern of inquiry.
                                                                                 25. See James’s idea of how we “heave” our will towards a new direction, cutting off another as we do so (in
                                                                                     Thayer, 1982, pp. 184 –185).
                                                                                 26. See Hajer (1995) on the re-framing that happens in the transformation of policy discourses.
                                                                                 27. See Healey (2004b), Briggs (2008).
                                                                                 28. Skilled practitioners have long known the reality of such contingencies. Social scientists are now giving these
                                                                                     much more attention (Jessop, 2002; Sørensen & Torfing, 2007; Westbrook, 2005).
                                                                                 29. See Barrett and Fudge (1981) for a discussion of the interactive relation between policy and action, which
                                                                                     argues that policies are often made as a consolidation of what is reflected in the flow of action.
                                                                                 30. See, for example, the classic case histories (Altshuler 1965; Meyerson & Banfield, 1955), and more recently
                                                                                     also Flyvbjerg (1998). Other accounts by strategic planners include Albrechts (2001), Goodstadt and Buchan
                                                                                     (2002), Krumholz and Forester (1990), Wannop (1985), while there are an increasing number of
                                                                                     “longitudinal” accounts of urban development and planning experiences in individual cities (for example,
                                                                                     Fainstein, 2001; Madanipour, 1998; Abbott, 2001; Punter, 2003; Hooper & Punter, 2006; Healey, 2007; Angotti,
                                                                                     2008; Briggs, 2008).



                                                                                 References
                                                                                 Abbott, C. (2001) Greater Portland: Urban Life and Landscape in the Pacific Northwest (Philadelphia, PA, University of
                                                                                   Pennsylvania Press).
                                                                                 Albrechts, L. (2001) How to proceed from image to discourse to action: as applied to the Flemish, Diamond, Urban
                                                                                   Studies, 38, pp. 733 –745.
                                                                                 Albrechts, L. (2003) Reconstructing decision-making: planning versus politics, Planning Theory, 2, pp. 249–268.
                                                                                 Albrechts, L. (2004) Strategic (Spatial) Planning Reexamined, Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 31,
                                                                                   pp. 743–758.
                                                                                 Albrechts, L. (2005) Creativity as a drive for change, Planning Theory, 4, pp. 247–269.
                                                                                 Albrechts, L., Alden, J. & Rosa Pires, A.D. (Eds) (2001) The Changing Institutional Landscape of Planning (Ashgate,
                                                                                   Aldershot).
                                                                                 Albrechts, L., Healey, P. & Kunzmann, K. (2003) Strategic Spatial Planning and Regional Governance in Europe,
                                                                                   Journal of the American Planning Association, 69, pp. 113 –129.
                                                                                 Altshuler, A. (1965) The City Planning Process: a political analysis (Ithaca, New York, Cornell University Press).
                                                                                 Amin, A., Massey, D. & Thrift, N. (2000) Cities for the Many not the Few (Bristol, The Policy Press).
                                                                                 Angotti, T. (2008) New York for Sale: community planning confronts global real estate (Boston, Mass, MIT Press).
                                                                                 Barrett, S. & Fudge, C. (1981) Policy and Action (London, Methuen).
                                                                                 Beauregard, R.A. (1998) Writing the Planner, Journal of Planning Education and Research, 18, pp. 93– 102.
                                                                                 Briggs, X.D.S. (2008) Democracy as problem-solving (Boston, Mass, MIT Press).
                                                                                 Campbell, H. (2006) Just planning: the art of situated ethical judgement, Journal of Planning Education and Research,
                                                                                   26, pp. 92–106.
                                                                                 Cars, G., Healey, P., Madanipour, A. & Magalhaes, C. (Eds) (2002) Urban Governance, Institutional Capacity and
                                                                                   Social Milieux (Aldershot, Hants, Ashgate).
                                                                                 Churchman, C.W. (1979) The Systems Approach (2nd edition) (New York, Dell Publishing).
                                                                                 Connolly, W.E. (1987) Politics and Ambiguity (Madison, Wisconsin, University of Wisconsin Press).
                                                                                 Connolly, W.E. (2005) Pluralism (Durham, Duke University Press).
                                                                                 Committee for Spatial Development (CSD) (1999), The European Spatial Development Perspective. Strasbourg,
                                                                                   European Commission.
                                                                                 456     P. Healey

                                                                                 Davidoff, P. & Reiner, T.A. (1962) A choice theory of planning, Journal of the American Institute of Planners, 28,
                                                                                   pp. 103–115.
                                                                                 Davoudi, S. (2006) Evidence-based policy: rhetoric and reality, DISP, 165, pp. 14–24.
                                                                                 Dewey, J. (1982) The pattern of inquiry, in: H.S. Thayer (Ed.) Pragmatism: the classic writings, pp. 316– 334
                                                                                   (Indianopolis, Hackett Publishing Co).
                                                                                 Dewey, J. (1991) The public and its problems (Athens, Ohio, Swallow Press/Ohio University Press).
                                                                                 Esping-Andersen, G. (1990) The Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism (Cambridge, Polity Press).
                                                                                 Fainstein, S. (2001) The City Builders: property development in New York and London 1980–2000 (Kansas, University of
                                                                                   Kansas Press).
                                                                                 Faludi, A. & van der Valk, A. (1994) Rule and Order in Dutch Planning Doctrine in the Twentieth Century (Dordrecht,
                                                                                   Kluwer Academic Publishers).
                                                                                 Fedeli, V. & Gastaldi, F. (Eds) (2004) Pratiche strategiche di pianificazione: riflessione a partire da nuovi spazi urbani in




Downloaded by [The University Of Melbourne Libraries] at 15:02 11 October 2014
                                                                                   costruzione (Milan, Franco Angeli).
                                                                                 Ferlie, E., Ashburner, L., Fitzgerald, L. & Pettigrew, A. (1996) The New Public Management in Action (Oxford,
                                                                                   Oxford University Press).
                                                                                 Flyvbjerg, B. (1998) Rationality and Power (Chicago, University of Chicago Press).
                                                                                 Flyvbjerg, B. (2001) Making Social Science Matter: Why Social Inquiry Fails and How It Can Succeed Again (Cambridge,
                                                                                   Cambridge University Press).
                                                                                 Forester, J. (1989) Planning in the face of power (Berkeley, University of California Press).
                                                                                 Forester, J. (1999) The Deliberative Practitioner: encouraging participatory planning processes (London, MIT Press).
                                                                                 Friedmann, J. (2002) The prospect of cities (Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press).
                                                                                 Friedmann, J. (2008) The Uses of Planning Theory: a bibliographic essay, Journal of Planning Education and Research,
                                                                                   28, pp. 247–257.
                                                                                 Giddens, A. (1984) The Constitution of Society (Cambridge, Polity Press).
                                                                                 Goodstadt, V. & Buchan, G. (2002) A statutory approach to community planning: repositioning the statutiry
                                                                                   development plan, in: G. Cars, P. Healey, A. Madanipour & C. de Magalhaes (Eds) Urban governance,
                                                                                   institutional capacity and social milieux, pp. 168–190 (Aldershot, Hants, Ashgate).
                                                                                 Grant, J. (2006) Planning the good community: new urbanism in theory and practice (London, Routledge).
                                                                                 Gualini, E. (2004) Integration, diversity and plurality: territorial governance and the reconstruction of legitimacy,
                                                                                   Geopolitics, 9, pp. 542–563.
                                                                                 Gualini, E. (2006) The Rescaling of governance in Europe: new spatial and institutional rationales, European
                                                                                   Planning Studies, 14(7), pp. 881– 904.
                                                                                 Habermas, J. (1984) The theory of Communicative Action: Vol 1: Reason and the Rationalisation of Society (Cambridge,
                                                                                   Polity Press).
                                                                                 Hajer, M. (1995) The politics of environmental discourse (Oxford, Oxford University Press).
                                                                                 Hajer, M. & Wagenaar, H. (Eds) (2003) Deliberative Policy Analysis: Understanding Governance in the Network Society
                                                                                   (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press).
                                                                                 Healey, P. (2004a) The treatment of space and place in the new strategic spatial planning in Europe, International
                                                                                   Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 28(1), pp. 45–67.
                                                                                 Healey, P. (2004b) Creativity and Urban Governance, Policy Studies, 25(2), pp. 87 –102.
                                                                                 Healey, P. (2006) Collaborative planning: shaping places in fragmented societies (London, Macmillan).
                                                                                 Healey, P. (2007) Urban Complexity and Spatial Strategies: towards a relational planning for our times (London,
                                                                                   Routledge).
                                                                                 Healey, P. (2008) Knowledge flows, spatial strategy-making and the roles of academics, Environment and Planning
                                                                                   C: Government and Policy, 26, pp. 861 –881.
                                                                                 Healey, P. (2009) The pragmatist tradition in planning thought, Journal of Planning Education and Research, 28(3),
                                                                                   pp. 277–292.
                                                                                 Healey, P., Khakee, A., Motte, A. & Needham, B. (Eds) (1997) Making strategic spatial plans: innovation in Europe
                                                                                   (London, UCL Press).
                                                                                 Hillier, J. (2007) Stretching beyond the horizon: a multiplanar theory of spatial planning and governance (Aldershot,
                                                                                   Ashgate).
                                                                                 Hillier, J. & Healey, P. (Eds) (2008) Foundations of the planning enterprise: Critical Readings in Planning Theory, Volume
                                                                                   1 (Aldershot, Hampshire, Ashgate).
                                                                                 Hillier, J (2008) Interplanary practice: towards a Deleuzian-inspired methodology for creative experimentation in
                                                                                   strategic spatial planning, in: J. Van den Broeck, F. Moulaert & S. Oosterlynck (Eds) Empowering the Planning
                                                                                   Fields: Ethics, Creativity and Action, pp. 43–77 (Leuven, Uitgeverij Acco).
                                                                                 Hoch, C. (2007) Making plans: representation and intention, Planning Theory, 6, pp. 16 –35.
                                                                                                                                                                In search of the “strategic”         457

                                                                                 Hooper, A.J. & Punter, J. (Eds) (2006) Capital Cardiff 1975– 2020: regeneration, competitiveness and the urban
                                                                                   environment (Cardiff, University of Wales Press).
                                                                                 Innes, J. & Booher, D. (1999) Consensus-building as role-playing and bricolage, Journal of the American Planning
                                                                                   Association, 65, pp. 9– 26.
                                                                                 Innes, J. & Booher, D. (2003) Collaborative policy-making: governance through dialogue, in: M. Hajer & H.
                                                                                   Wagenaar (Eds) Deliberative Policy Analysis: Understanding governance in the network society, pp. 33 –59
                                                                                   (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press).
                                                                                 Jessop, B. (2002) The Future of the Capitalist State (Cambridge, Polity Press).
                                                                                 Kingdon, J.W. (2003) Agendas, alternatives, and public policies (New York, Longman).
                                                                                 Kitchen, J.E. (1997) People, politics, policies and plans (London, Paul Chapman).
                                                                                 Kitchen, T. (2007) Skills for Planning Practice (Basingstoke, Palgrave).
                                                                                 Krumholz, N. & Forester, J. (1990) Making Equity Planning Work (Philadelphia, Temple University Press).




Downloaded by [The University Of Melbourne Libraries] at 15:02 11 October 2014
                                                                                 Le Galès, P. (2002) European Cities: Social Conflicts and Governance (Oxford, Oxford University Press).
                                                                                 Lindblom, C.E. (1990) Inquiry and Change: The troubled attempt to understand and shape society (New Haven, Yale
                                                                                   University Press).
                                                                                 Madanipour, A. (1998) Tehran (Chichester, John Wiley and Sons).
                                                                                 Marshall, T. (Ed.) (2004) Transforming Barcelona (London, Routledge).
                                                                                 Meyerson, M. & Banfield, E. (1955) Politics, planning and the public interest (New York, Free Press).
                                                                                 Mintzberg, H. (1994) The Rise and Fall of Strategic Planning (Edinburgh, Pearson Education Limited).
                                                                                 Motte, A. (Ed.) (2007) Les agglomerations francaises face aux defis metropolitaines (Paris, Economica/Anthropos).
                                                                                 Nasr, J. & Volait, M. (Eds) (2003) Urbanism: imported or exported? Native aspirations and foreign plans (Chichester,
                                                                                   Sussex, Wiley-Academy).
                                                                                 Newman, P. (2008) Strategic Spatial Planning: Collective action and moments of opportunity, European Planning
                                                                                   Studies, 16(10), pp. 1371–1383.
                                                                                 Punter, J. (2003) The Vancouver Achievement (Vancouver, B.C, UBC Press).
                                                                                 Salet, W. & Faludi, A. (2000) The revival of strategic spatial planning, Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van
                                                                                   Wetenschappen (Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences), Amsterdam
                                                                                 Salet, W., Thornley, A. & Kreukels, A. (Eds) (2003) (London, E&FN Spon), Metropolitan Governance and Spatial
                                                                                   Planning: Comparative studies of European city-regions.
                                                                                 Salet, W. & Thornley, A. (2007) Institutional influences on the integration of multilevel governance and spatial
                                                                                   policy in European City-Regions, Journal of Planning Education and Research, 27, pp. 188 –198.
                                                                                 Schon, D. (1983) The Reflective Practitioner (New York, Basic Books).
                                                                                 Schon, D. & Rein, M. (1994) Frame reflection: towards the resolution of intractable policy controversies (New York, Basic
                                                                                   Books).
                                                                                 Sørensen, E. & Torfing, J. (Eds) (2007) Theories of Democratic Network Governance (Basingstoke, Hants, Palgrave
                                                                                   Macmillan).
                                                                                 Tarrow, S. (1994) Power in movement (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press).
                                                                                 Thayer, H.S. (Ed.) (1982) Pragmatism: the classic writings (Indianapolis, Hackett Publishing Co).
                                                                                 Van den Broeck, J., Moulaert, F. & Oosterlynck, S. (Eds) (2008) Empowering the planning fields (Leuven, Acco).
                                                                                 Verma, N. (1998) Similarities, connections, systems: the search for a new rationality for planning and management
                                                                                   (Lanham, Maryland, Lexington Books).
                                                                                 Vickers, G. (1965) The Art of Judgement: a study of policy-making (London, Chapman Hall).
                                                                                 Vigar, G., Healey, P., Hull, A. & Davoudi, S. (2000) Planning, governance and spatial strategy in Britain (London,
                                                                                   Macmillan).
                                                                                 Vigar, G., Graham, S. & Healey, P. (2005) In search of the city in Spatial Strategies: past legacies and future
                                                                                   imaginings, Urban Studies, 42(8), pp. 1391–1410.
                                                                                 Wannop, U. (1985) The practice of rationality: the case of the Coventry-Solihull-Warwickshire Subregional
                                                                                   Planning Study, in: M. Breheny & A.J. Hooper (Eds) Rationality in Planning, pp. 196 –208 (London, Pion).
                                                                                 Ward, S. (2002) Planning in the Twentieth Century: The Advanced Capitalist World (London, Wiley).
                                                                                 Westbrook, R.B. (2005) Democratic hope: pragmatism and the politics of truth (Ithaca and London, Cornell University
                                                                                   Press).
                                                                                 Weston, A. (1996) Before environmental ethics, in: A. Light & E. Katz (Eds) Environmental Pragmatism, pp. 139 –160
                                                                                   (Oxford, Routledge).
                                                                                 Wheeler, S.M. (2002) The New Regionalism: characteristics of an emerging movement, Journal of the American
                                                                                   Planning Association, 68(3), pp. 267– 278.
                                                                                 Yanow, D. & Schwartz-Shea, P. (Eds) (2006) Interpretation and Method: Empirical research methods and the interpretive
                                                                                   turn (New York, M.E.Sharpe).
