[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: journal/M16-healey-2006-transforming-governance-challenges-of-institutional-adaptation-and-a-new-politics-of-space-10.1080-09654310500420792.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Title:           Transforming governance: Challenges of institutional adaptation and a new politics of space1
Subject:         European Planning Studies 2006.14:299-320
Author:          Patsy Healey
Producer:        iText 2.1.5 (by lowagie.com)
CreationDate:    Tue Dec 11 15:50:12 2012 WIB
ModDate:         Tue Dec 11 15:50:12 2012 WIB
Custom Metadata: no
Metadata Stream: no
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            none
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           23
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       493 x 703 pts
Page rot:        0
File size:       330184 bytes
Optimized:       no
PDF version:     1.4
[Extracted Text]
This article was downloaded by: [University of Arizona]
On: 11 December 2012, At: 00:50
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK



                                 European Planning Studies
                                 Publication details, including instructions for authors and
                                 subscription information:
                                 http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ceps20

                                 Transforming governance: Challenges
                                 of institutional adaptation and a new
                                 politics of space
                                                a
                                 Patsy Healey
                                 a
                                  Global Urbanism Research Unit, School of Architecture, Planning
                                 and Landscape, University of Newcastle, UK
                                 Version of record first published: 20 Aug 2006.


To cite this article: Patsy Healey (2006): Transforming governance: Challenges of institutional
adaptation and a new politics of space , European Planning Studies, 14:3, 299-320

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09654310500420792



PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Full terms and conditions of use: http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-
conditions

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden.

The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation
that the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date. The accuracy of any
instructions, formulae, and drug doses should be independently verified with primary
sources. The publisher shall not be liable for any loss, actions, claims, proceedings,
demand, or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or
indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material.
                                                                  European Planning Studies Vol. 14, No. 3, April 2006




                                                                  Transforming Governance: Challenges
                                                                  of Institutional Adaptation and a New
                                                                  Politics of Space1

                                                                  PATSY HEALEY




Downloaded by [University of Arizona] at 00:50 11 December 2012
                                                                  Global Urbanism Research Unit, School of Architecture, Planning and Landscape, University of Newcastle,
                                                                  UK



                                                                  [Received August 2004; accepted June 2005]



                                                                  ABSTRACT In the context of the widespread recognition of significant changes in urban and
                                                                  regional governance in Europe, this paper explores the ways of understanding the dynamics of
                                                                  these changes and comments on the implications for recent themes in contemporary debates
                                                                  about urban governance—the extent of the re-scaling of governance arenas and networks, the
                                                                  role of a territorial focus in the new urban governance, the emergence of new forms of politics
                                                                  and the balance of progressive versus regressive potentials in the “new” governance. A brief
                                                                  introduction raises questions about the nature of the perceived experimentation and
                                                                  fragmentation in contemporary urban governance. The paper then outlines an emerging
                                                                  “sociological institutionalist” approach to governance transformation processes which links
                                                                  together the worlds of actors in episodes of governance with the rhythm of established
                                                                  governance processes—networks, discourses and practices, and the deeper cultural assumptions
                                                                  which give authority and legitimacy to actors and processes. The arguments are then illustrated
                                                                  through examples of governance initiatives from different arenas within a particular urban
                                                                  region, all of which to an extent challenge established discourses and practices. The paper
                                                                  concludes with some comments on how to interpret the broader significance and trajectory of
                                                                  transformative shifts in urban governance processes.



                                                                  Urban Governance Transformation Processes
                                                                  For the past 20 years, social science and public policy debate in Europe have focused
                                                                  attention on the changing governance of cities and urban regions. The reasons for this
                                                                  are broadly shared—the new politics of European “integration”, the impact of globali-
                                                                  zation on the relative importance of the nation state vis-à-vis sub-national governance
                                                                  arenas, the shifting dynamics of local economies in the face of globalizing tendencies,


                                                                  Correspondence Address: Patsy Healey, Global Urbanism Research Unit, School of Architecture, Planning and
                                                                  Landscape, University of Newcastle, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. Email: healey@phealey.freeserve.co.uk

                                                                  ISSN 0965-4313 print=ISSN 1469-5944 online=06=030299–22          # 2006 Taylor & Francis
                                                                  DOI: 10.1080=09654310500420792
                                                                  300   P. Healey

                                                                  the changes in the forms of social welfare delivery and transfer payments, the changes in
                                                                  social expectations about policy agendas and modes of politics (Amin & Hausner, 1997;
                                                                  Cars et al., 2002; John, 2001; Le Gales, 2002; Pierre, 1998). However, there is much con-
                                                                  troversy about the nature and significance of the emergent governance forms which are
                                                                  arising. Some emphasize the “re-scaling” of governance arenas and networks (Brenner,
                                                                  1999; MacLeod, 1999; MacLeod & Goodwin, 1999; Swyngedouw, 2005). Others are
                                                                  exploring the nature of the territorial focus emerging at new scales (Albrechts et al.,
                                                                  2001; Albrechts et al., 2003; Fürst & Kneilung, 2002; Healey, 2004, 2006; Novarina,
                                                                  2003; Salet & Faludi, 2000; Salet et al., 2003). There are also debates about the extent
                                                                  to which new forms of politics are developing (Healey, 1997a; Hajer & Wagenaar,
                                                                  2003) and whether these are progressive or regressive in their direction (Harvey, 1989;
                                                                  Imrie & Raco, 1999; Swyngedouw, 2005).
                                                                     Earlier structural analysts presented cities as sites for the organization of “collective




Downloaded by [University of Arizona] at 00:50 11 December 2012
                                                                  consumption” (Castells, 1977; Saunders, 1979), the organization of welfare delivery.
                                                                  This could take many forms, from bureaucratic procedures, to rational policy analysis,
                                                                  to interest-based politics and clientelism. Shifts in urban governance were then seen as
                                                                  structured by contestation over the manner and distribution of welfare activity, over the
                                                                  balance between social and economic objectives and over the tendency for some
                                                                  governance insiders to pursue private interests under the cover of public authority. But
                                                                  by the 1980s, it became obvious that urban elites were deeply concerned about their
                                                                  local economies, especially in areas affected by the decline of traditional industries.
                                                                  David Harvey (1989) described the change as one from “managerialism” to “entrepre-
                                                                  neurialism”, as urban governing elites shift attention to the promotion of projects and strat-
                                                                  egies to re-configure and re-position their local economies. By the 1990s, regulation
                                                                  theorists had become interested in the extent to which changes in urban governance
                                                                  processes reflected a shift in “mode of regulation”, to parallel the shift in “modes of
                                                                  accumulation” from Fordism to post-Fordism (Jessop, 2000, 2002; Painter, 1997). It is
                                                                  in this context that the “re-scaling” debate surfaced (Brenner, 1999; MacLeod, 1999).
                                                                  Others began to explore the extent to which urban processes were structured by markets
                                                                  (the logic of economic activity), hierarchies (the logic of the established twentieth
                                                                  century welfare state) or networks (the logic of webs of social relations stretching in mul-
                                                                  tiple space/times, rather than just hierarchically (Amin and Hausner, 1997; Castells,
                                                                  1996). These and other contributions argued that a new form of politics was emerging
                                                                  for a new globalizing or “network” society (see also Hajer, 2003).
                                                                     But such analyses assumed a certain coherence in urban governance processes and their
                                                                  manner of transformation. In contrast, other analysts whose focus of attention was on the
                                                                  working out of particular policies and mechanisms in urban governance contexts high-
                                                                  lighted the experience of “fragmentation” in the 1980s (Cars et al., 2002; Le Gales,
                                                                  2002; Pierre, 1998). Established procedures were perceived as breaking down, in different
                                                                  ways in different areas of governance activity. Systematic “comprehensive” town plan-
                                                                  ning was giving way to a project-driven practice which broke through the constraints of
                                                                  bureaucratically-delivered norms and standards. Poverty policies moved from a focus
                                                                  on the distribution of access to dwellings and welfare benefits to citizen empowerment
                                                                  and area regeneration projects. All kinds of experiments appeared—new kinds of
                                                                  project and new kinds of “partnership” between actors within formal government and
                                                                  between formal government, the economy and civil society. Instead of nesting neatly in
                                                                  a hierarchical model of levels of government responsibility, new urban governance
                                                                                                                            Transforming Governance        301

                                                                  arenas and practices were introduced which drew in actors from a variety of different
                                                                  levels of government, from the level of the European Union (EU) to local neighbourhood
                                                                  organizations.
                                                                     Whatever the assumptions about the driving forces of change, these empirical experi-
                                                                  ences raise questions about how to understand the dynamics of contemporary struggles to
                                                                  introduce new urban and regional governance agencies and new modes of governance. Do
                                                                  the experiences represent the dynamic evolution of new scales of governance articulation?
                                                                  Or the emergence of “territory” as a new focus in public policy, to challenge deeply-
                                                                  embedded traditions of sectoral government policy communities? Or are they a sign of
                                                                  a new collaborative mode of policy formation, to challenge the traditional separation
                                                                  of politics and policy-making? Is the experience of “fragmentation” to be understood
                                                                  as new social reality in itself, a more market-like, competitive mode of governance, in
                                                                  which authority and responsibility, actions and consequences, become hard to identify




Downloaded by [University of Arizona] at 00:50 11 December 2012
                                                                  and therefore difficult to call to account? Or is it to be understood as a process of
                                                                  “dis-integration”, reflecting the weakness of a territorial focus of governance in the
                                                                  face of global networks and technologies, a sign of a disappearing urban collective
                                                                  actor? Or is such disintegration quite the opposite, a necessary destabilization which
                                                                  generates the “moments of opportunity” for new governance modes, coalitions and
                                                                  agendas focused around a strong territorial sensibility able to generate new relations of
                                                                  “integration” so that a city or urban region can once again become a strong collective
                                                                  actor locally and in the European arena? Is the process one of re-scaling arenas from
                                                                  city and “nation state” to “urban region” and “neighbourhood”, with the consequent
                                                                  challenge to create a territorial collective actor around a new arena and scale? Or is
                                                                  the “fragmentation” there all the time, for any analyst to see who looks carefully
                                                                  enough at the fine-grain of urban governance processes? Should urban governance be
                                                                  understood as in “continual transformation”?
                                                                     To address these questions, some “intermediate” analytical tools between the language
                                                                  of structural transformation and that of the experience of particular actors in particular
                                                                  places are needed.2 Information is drawn in this paper from a particular strand of “insti-
                                                                  tutionalist analysis”, particularly as developed in policy analysis and planning, to
                                                                  develop an approach to the analysis of urban governance transformation processes. In
                                                                  this paper, the aim is to summarize this approach, and then illustrate its use in relation
                                                                  to examples from different arenas of governance within an urban region, all of which in
                                                                  some way challenge established governance processes. From the approach and experience,
                                                                  comments are made on the themes raised at the start of this paper and the issue of how to
                                                                  understand contemporary experiences of fragmented urban governance.



                                                                  An Institutionalist Approach to Governance Transformation
                                                                  There are many academic frames of analysis which currently cluster under the
                                                                  “institutional” and “institutionalist” label. Broadly, they all share a recognition of the
                                                                  importance of “institutions” in shaping social action. Any analyst of governance processes
                                                                  is inherently concerned with the “institutions” through which social action is mobilized
                                                                  and regulated and hence is to some extent an institutionalist, as political scientists
                                                                  recognize (Peters, 1999). “Institutionalists” differ, however, in the meaning given to insti-
                                                                  tutions and in their ontologies and epistemologies. Within this array, the author’s own
                                                                  302   P. Healey

                                                                  work has developed in a social constructivist and non-positivist frame, related to a
                                                                  dynamic, relational view of social action (Healey, 1999, 2004a).
                                                                     From this viewpoint, institutions are understood as the ensemble of norms, rules and
                                                                  practices which structure action in social contexts (Giddens, 1984; Powell & Dimaggio,
                                                                  1991). Such ensembles are brought into existence and given meaning through continual
                                                                  active effort, which re-inforces and changes both meanings and materialities. Social
                                                                  action is constituted by people acting in relation to others, not just through the pursuit
                                                                  of an individualized “rational calculus”. In such interaction, people draw on a (shifting)
                                                                  store of cultural resources through which meanings, values and “knowledge” are shaped
                                                                  (Fischer, 2003; Hall & Taylor, 1996).
                                                                     In this “sociological” view of “institutionalism”, the term “governance” has a double
                                                                  connotation. Analytically, it can be used to describe all the processes for the regulation
                                                                  and mobilization of social action. In this meaning, there are always governance processes




Downloaded by [University of Arizona] at 00:50 11 December 2012
                                                                  (Cars et al., 2002; Le Gales, 2002) The research question becomes an empirical inquiry
                                                                  into modes of governance manifest in a particular time and place. The political question
                                                                  centres on which modes to pursue in a particular instance in relation to specific concerns.
                                                                  But as a sociological phenomenon, it is also necessary to look at the way the term
                                                                  “governance” is being used in a particular context and the “institutional work” its use
                                                                  performs. In Europe at present, the term is often deployed by analysts and political
                                                                  actors to describe a particular transformation, from modes of government associated
                                                                  with a bureaucratized welfare state focused on universal service delivery to the more
                                                                  “entrepreneurial” modes of governance recognized by commentators such as David
                                                                  Harvey (1989) and Bob Jessop (1998, 2002).
                                                                     In the author’s own work, the general meaning of “governance” is used to encompass all
                                                                  forms of collective action focused on the public realm (sphere) in one way or another, from
                                                                  those orchestrated by formal government agencies, to lobby groups, self-regulating groups
                                                                  and social campaigns and movements targeted at resistance or challenge to dominant
                                                                  governance relations. Analytically, there is no necessary reason why these diverse
                                                                  governance processes should be articulated around an “urban” or any other territorial
                                                                  focus, although in Europe, as Le Gales (2002) convincingly argues, there are strong
                                                                  traditions of “city government” and territorial identity which provide cultural and organiz-
                                                                  ational resources for such a focus. In examining current transformations in urban govern-
                                                                  ance, the author’s specific current interest is in the extent to which the diverse actors and
                                                                  networks which coexist within a territory, urban region, city or neighbourhood cluster
                                                                  around a territorial focus, and create the capacity to act (collective actor capacity) for a
                                                                  territory. And there is interest in the potential regressive and progressive consequences of
                                                                  particular institutionalizations of such a territorial imagination and collective actor capacity.
                                                                  This interest connects to the wider debates in urban governance analysis about the
                                                                  “re-scaling” and “re-territorialization” of contemporary sub-national governance.
                                                                     How then may these institution-building processes be examined? Traditional institu-
                                                                  tionalists in political science focused on the creation of formal competences, procedures
                                                                  and laws. Or they examined the “overt” politics of battles for formal political control of
                                                                  key arenas and the resources attached to them. These days, analysts struggle with the rec-
                                                                  ognition of the huge multiplicity and complexity of governance processes manifest within
                                                                  an urban area. There are the various and usually sectoralized agencies of higher tiers of
                                                                  EU, national and regional government; the different segments of a municipal admini-
                                                                  stration and the professional and policy communities to which they are typically connected;
                                                                                                                             Transforming Governance        303

                                                                  the organizations of representative democracy, with the structures of municipal councils
                                                                  and neighbourhood districts, linked to the organization of political parties and electoral
                                                                  processes. There are a whole array of individual actors and social networks and lobby
                                                                  groups linking businesses and citizens to the formal arenas of government, intertwining
                                                                  in complex ways the worlds of the state, the economy and civil society. These linkages
                                                                  looking “from outside in” to formal government are complemented by the linkages
                                                                  “from inside out”, ranging from formal initiatives in building partnerships or “empower-
                                                                  ing” particular groups to participate in “their” governance, to the informal networks which
                                                                  connect politicians and officials with firms and lobby groups, and in which they participate
                                                                  as citizens themselves. Thus the landscape of the “everyday life” practices of governance
                                                                  in an urban region is not a clearly demarcated territory of levels of government and public
                                                                  versus private action, but a complexly intertwined social reality in which integrations and
                                                                  boundaries, cohesions and exclusions cannot be read off from simple “maps” of organi-




Downloaded by [University of Arizona] at 00:50 11 December 2012
                                                                  zational structures.
                                                                     In the author’s own work in exploring territorially-focused governance transformation
                                                                  processes, four strands of conceptualization are combined together: Giddensian concepts
                                                                  of the binding flows which link agency to structuring processes (Giddens, 1984; Bryson &
                                                                  Crosby, 1992); Hajer’s notions of discourse structuration and institutionalization (Hajer,
                                                                  1995); concepts of levels of power developed by Lukes and re-worked by Dyrberg
                                                                  (Dyrberg, 1997), and ideas about institutional capacity-building developed by Innes and
                                                                  Booher (2003) and Healey and colleagues (Healey, 1998; Healey et al., 2003).
                                                                     Giddens’ structuration theory addresses the interaction between external “structuring”
                                                                  pressures and how actors-in-social-relations respond to these through an emphasis on
                                                                  the formative interaction between “structures” and “agency” (Giddens, 1984).3 Giddens
                                                                  identifies key linkages through which this interaction flows, and which in turn shape the
                                                                  materialities and identities of actors and create the structural forces which they experience.
                                                                  The first is the flow of material resources (goods and assets, technologies, finance, labour
                                                                  power). The second is the flow of authoritative resources or regulatory power, the power to
                                                                  regulate the behaviour of others through formal and informal norms, codes, laws, etc. The
                                                                  third is the flow of ideas and frames of reference, the power to generate new imaginations
                                                                  and shape identities and values. These flows interweave with each other in different spaces
                                                                  and through different temporalities, producing the material distributions and mental
                                                                  expectations which generate the diversities and inequalities in life experiences. To the
                                                                  extent that they follow stable patterns, they generate the “structural forces” that exert
                                                                  such a powerful influence on opportunities for particular people in particular places.
                                                                  But their patterning is also in continual formation, through shifts in their interactions
                                                                  and through the continual creative work of agency in both realizing and resisting the tra-
                                                                  ditions and forces which bear down upon them. Transformations in urban governance
                                                                  driven by structuring forces would, following this approach, be identified through the
                                                                  power mobilized as resources are circulated, regulatory norms activated and concepts
                                                                  brought to life in arguments and justifications. Transformations driven by agency power
                                                                  in specific situations would be identified by their capacity to produce different patterning
                                                                  tendencies through the impact of the active work of, for example, a territorial collective
                                                                  actor arena.
                                                                     But such an analysis would say little about how such dynamics were brought about and
                                                                  in effect could become little more than the traditional input – output analysis of Eastonian
                                                                  policy analysis which treated an institutional site of policy-making as a “black box”
                                                                  304   P. Healey

                                                                  (Easton, 1965). For many years now, it has been recognized that it is necessary to enter this
                                                                  “black box” to examine the complex dynamics of actors and networks as they struggle
                                                                  over resource allocation, over regulatory practices and over framing ideas. Over the
                                                                  past 20 years, there has been an explosion of in-depth case studies of governance processes
                                                                  examining policy formation, policy change and policy “implementation”.4
                                                                     Initially, the focus of the stories of these cases was on themes such as the inadequacy of
                                                                  the formalized rational planning model to account for the processes described, or the
                                                                  power of particular groups to define what had been assumed to be the “public interest”
                                                                  which government agencies should pursue. More recently, drawing on policy discourse
                                                                  analysis, there has been a stronger emphasis on how policy change is brought about. A
                                                                  primary inspiration here has been the work of Maarten Hajer (1995) who described the
                                                                  processes of “discourse structuration” and its subsequent “institutionalization”. In his
                                                                  work on the acid rain controversy, he looked at a period of policy contestation in a




Downloaded by [University of Arizona] at 00:50 11 December 2012
                                                                  particular department of British government during which the structure of framing ideas
                                                                  was finally shifted by the efforts of activists and scientists who eventually won the
                                                                  argument over the causes and effects of British power station emissions on the acidity
                                                                  of lakes and rivers in north-west Europe. Once this argument was won at the centre of
                                                                  a centralized government policy system dealing with energy and pollution effects, it
                                                                  spread through an array of sub-national government arenas through the central power to
                                                                  define regulations and monitor regulatory practices. The new discourse thus became
                                                                  institutionalized, embedded in norms, practices and discourses, as a new normality.
                                                                  This raises the issue of how discourses and practices come to “travel” from one arena
                                                                  to another and what happens to them as they do so.5 Following these ways of analysing
                                                                  governance processes, urban governance transformation could be identified where a
                                                                  new discursive frame appears and diffuses to a range of arenas with sufficient effect
                                                                  to shift significantly the way resources are allocated and regulatory tools formulated
                                                                  and used.
                                                                     In the author’s own work on the power of ideas and practices generated in a partnership
                                                                  to diffuse more widely into “mainstream” urban governance practices, significant barriers
                                                                  to such diffusion were found (Healey et al., 2003). This confirmed not only the experience
                                                                  of other similar episodes in innovation in area partnerships across the city that were exam-
                                                                  ined, but echoed much of the British experience of urban regeneration partnerships
                                                                  (Carley, 2000; Hastings, 1996; Healey, 1997b; Healey et al., 2003; Lowndes & Skelcher,
                                                                  1998; Peck & Tickell, 1994). In trying to grasp the nature of these barriers, there was a
                                                                  move away from a conception of the landscape of governance as merely an array of differ-
                                                                  ent institutional sites or arenas, articulated with each other and with the worlds of econo-
                                                                  mic activity and civil society by dynamic webs of relations, all operating as sites of
                                                                  everyday practices. It was felt necessary to explore more explicitly the deeper structuring
                                                                  that was present in these practices but not always recognized by actors in the episodes in
                                                                  which they were engaged. The idea here is that transformative initiatives which succeed
                                                                  in “institutionalization” need to have the capacity to “travel” not just from one arena to
                                                                  another, but from one level of consciousness to another. By this, a translation is meant
                                                                  from the level of conscious actor invention and mobilization to that of routinization as
                                                                  accepted practices, and beyond that to broadly accepted cultural norms and values. To
                                                                  analyse this, a concept of “levels of power”, first articulated by Lukes in 1974, and re-
                                                                  worked later by Giddens (1984) and Dyrberg (1997) is studied. Figure 1 summarizes
                                                                  this conception.6
                                                                                                                            Transforming Governance       305




Downloaded by [University of Arizona] at 00:50 11 December 2012
                                                                  Figure 1. Levels and dimensions of governance: an analytical schema. Note: This figure is an
                                                                             adaptation of equivalents in Healey (2006) and Coaffee & Healey (2003)


                                                                     Figure 1 expresses the hypothesis that, to have transformative effects, governance inno-
                                                                  vations (such as new discourses, new allocatory or regulatory practices, the formation of
                                                                  new arenas or networks) must move from explicit formation episodes to arenas of invest-
                                                                  ment and regulatory practice. To endure, they have to become institutionalized in the
                                                                  routines of governance practices. At the level of specific episodes of experience, those
                                                                  actively involved may develop what they believe are new and relevant conceptions of
                                                                  issues, objectives and appropriate processes which guide their own practices. But it is
                                                                  hard to get these new conceptions and their implications to “travel” to other arenas just
                                                                  through processes of “snowballing” individual learning experiences. This is not just
                                                                  because there are other actors in other arenas seeking to resist such initiatives or to
                                                                  promote their own learning experiences. New concepts have to challenge and shift an
                                                                  array of already routinized governance processes, with their complex mixture of conscious
                                                                  and taken-for-granted modes of practice. New concepts have to “jump” boundaries and
                                                                  “break through” resistances, involving implicit and explicit struggles. For initiatives
                                                                  seeking to create a new concept and arena for territorially-focused collective action,
                                                                  this may involve a complexity of relations between different departments of local govern-
                                                                  ment, between administrators/officials and politicians, between politicians/officials and
                                                                  citizens, between the state and all kinds of power elites and lobby groups, each with
                                                                  their own relation to allocative power, regulatory power and their own discursive
                                                                  frames. Sustaining and legitimizing both governance processes and specific episodes of
                                                                  governance are cultural assumptions about appropriate agendas and practices of govern-
                                                                  ance held by different social groups in society generally. It is through these assumptions,
                                                                  as recognized by actors themselves and the “media chorus” of critical commentary on their
                                                                  performance, and as evaluated in the formal procedures for challenging governance
                                                                  actions, that those involved in governance are held to account and their legitimacy
                                                                  judged. Shifts at this cultural level, promoted by long-term shifts in economic, socio-
                                                                  cultural and political relations, influence both those involved in particular episodes of
                                                                  governance and those involved in routine governance practices. These “prepare the
                                                                  ground” for new ideas and discursive vocabularies.
                                                                     These levels are not separate realities but mutually constitute moments of governance
                                                                  activity and the everyday life experience of “doing government work”. The reasons for
                                                                  306   P. Healey

                                                                  an analytical separation is that the levels move according to different temporalities and
                                                                  respond to different driving forces. The pressure for transformation may come from any
                                                                  of the levels. Episodes of innovation may create pressures to change governance processes
                                                                  more generally, but there may also be mobilization efforts to initiate such changes else-
                                                                  where in governance systems. Shifts in cultural assumptions may put pressure for
                                                                  change on governance processes but provide resources for episodes of innovation. This
                                                                  conception of different experiential levels of governance firstly emphasizes the complex-
                                                                  ity, the multiplicity of interacting and often counteracting movements promoting and
                                                                  resisting change, the multiple timescales and the likely instability of urban governance
                                                                  transformation processes. Secondly, it stresses that significant transformation would
                                                                  have to affect the level of governance process at the least. To achieve this, initiatives
                                                                  would have to move from the level of an episode to the level of processes, and in some
                                                                  way find resonances with cultural assumptions to have any capacity to be seen as legiti-




Downloaded by [University of Arizona] at 00:50 11 December 2012
                                                                  mate and to endure, that is, to “institutionalize”.
                                                                     Figure 2 links this conception of levels of governance with the earlier discussion of the
                                                                  Giddensian relation between structure and agency. Episodes of governance are shaped by
                                                                  structuring power embodied in the mobilization of rules and norms, material resources and
                                                                  framing ideas, but they may also be creative of them, implicitly by interpretive work or
                                                                  explicitly by direct challenge. Rules, resources and framing ideas may be vigourously sus-
                                                                  tained by mobilizing work at the level of governance processes. But these processes may
                                                                  also be open to pressures from broader cultural shifts and from the learning and mobilizing
                                                                  taking place in specific episodes. At the level of cultural assumptions, the authority of
                                                                  rules, the justice of resource allocations and the validity of framing discourses is under
                                                                  continual challenge and re-formulation, re-moulding the principles of legitimacy and
                                                                  accountability through which governance processes and episodes are judged.
                                                                     In this approach, it is clear that what we take to be “politics” and “policy” are not articu-
                                                                  lated merely in either the formal arenas of council chambers or the informal processes in




                                                                  Figure 2. Transformation initiatives in governance dynamics. Note: Although laid out as separate
                                                                              levels and structuring dimensions, in any actual instance these all interact
                                                                                                                             Transforming Governance        307

                                                                  which politicians are involved. As Hajer (2003) argues, politics and policy-formation
                                                                  emerge from many institutional sites and processes. In this complex institutional
                                                                  terrain, building a new territorial arena of governance or a new mode of politics is
                                                                  likely to involve very challenging efforts in mobilization, in discourse formation and dif-
                                                                  fusion, and in aligning old practices with new discourses. This is widely acknowledged in
                                                                  the literature on the difficulties of establishing urban region or metropolitan governance
                                                                  where none existed before (Albrechts et al., 2001; Healey, 2004; Herrschel & Newman,
                                                                  2002; Salet et al., 2003). Yet sometimes new territorial arenas have emerged as powerful
                                                                  collective actors. The structural arguments for “re-scaling” urban governance to the urban
                                                                  region scale suggest there are contextual pressures acting on all the levels and structuring
                                                                  dimensions of governance identified in Figure 2 which create a “moment of opportunity”
                                                                  for such institution-building work to succeed.
                                                                     This leads to the fourth strand of concepts, which focus on the building of “institutional




Downloaded by [University of Arizona] at 00:50 11 December 2012
                                                                  capacity” (Amin & Thrift, 1995; Innes & Booher, 2003; Healey, 1998; Healey et al.,
                                                                  2003). Some analysts focus on the qualities of “leaders”, building on notions of individual
                                                                  capacities (“human capacity”). This kind of approach leads to an emphasis on the qualities
                                                                  of actors such as City Mayors and key professionals who have had a role in transforming
                                                                  some city government agendas and processes. But enduring governance transformation
                                                                  rarely results from the actions of single individuals. Most transformatory episodes
                                                                  mobilize networks of political supporters and expertise, often linking across traditional
                                                                  boundaries and divisions, and with the knowledge to challenge concepts and assumptions
                                                                  embedded in established practices. This suggests that capacity building is a social process,
                                                                  generating, to use Innes and Booher’s concept, intellectual, social and political capital
                                                                  (Booher & Innes, 2002). In the author’s own work, the notion of “resources”, rather
                                                                  than “capital” has been preferred.7 This examined how and why the resources deployed
                                                                  and developed in an episode of governance largely failed to diffuse into the wider govern-
                                                                  ance context (see the examples which follow). More generally, this work on institutional
                                                                  capacity-building emphasizes that urban governance transformation which leads to the
                                                                  institutionalization of a new territorial collective actor with significant authoritative and
                                                                  generative power needs to mobilize and build knowledge resources and relational
                                                                  resources (social networks) which not only help to consolidate power and legitimacy
                                                                  around the new arena but have the capacity to carry the new ideas, understandings and rec-
                                                                  ognitions of opportunity and struggle through to a wide range of other arenas in the urban
                                                                  governance landscape where practices shape how resources flow and regulatory rules are
                                                                  exercised.
                                                                     In the next section, the approach outlined earlier is illustrated through three brief
                                                                  examples. They have been selected from the author’s own work in Newcastle as repre-
                                                                  sentative of attempted innovations, initiated from different positions in an urban govern-
                                                                  ance landscape. The first is a city centre regeneration partnership.8 The second is an
                                                                  attempt at a city-wide development strategy.9 The third is an initiative arising from
                                                                  outside the range of formal government which has slowly been drawn into a more
                                                                  formalized relationship.10 In each case, the initiative as an episode of governance activity
                                                                  in terms of its territorial focus of attention and its position in the governance landscape is
                                                                  outlined. Then, the potential of each initiative to institutionalize, using the analytical
                                                                  lens of Figure 2, is assessed. Finally, the implications of these experiences for the
                                                                  potential for governance transformation in the Newcastle governance context are
                                                                  commentated on.11
                                                                  308   P. Healey

                                                                  The Lurching Pace of Innovative Momentum
                                                                  The Newcastle Governance Landscape
                                                                  As an urban region, the area is one of Britain’s industrial conurbations, with a population
                                                                  of around 1.5 million in its travel-to-work area, which also includes rural areas, coasts
                                                                  and hills, and attractive small towns. Although considerable shifts in social composition
                                                                  are taking place, with an expanding middle class and an ageing and largely static overall
                                                                  demographic profile, it is an area still characterized by high levels of unemployment and
                                                                  social deprivation relative to national levels. There is currently no overall political-
                                                                  administrative government for the most urbanized part of the conurbation, which is
                                                                  divided into five large metropolitan districts. Politically, Newcastle is just one of
                                                                  those districts, although, with some political reluctance from neighbouring districts,
                                                                  Newcastle city centre is recognized as the “regional centre” of the wider urban




Downloaded by [University of Arizona] at 00:50 11 December 2012
                                                                  region. Metropolitan districts are responsible for education, social service delivery, plan-
                                                                  ning and some aspects of transport provision, as well as environmental health, housing
                                                                  management (of what was, in Newcastle’s case, once a large council-owned housing
                                                                  stock) and promotion of leisure, sport and cultural provision. Councils also engage vig-
                                                                  ourously in economic development initiatives, though their work in this field is on a
                                                                  much smaller scale than that of regional agencies. There are also important agencies
                                                                  operating at the regional scale dealing with economic development, health, tourism pro-
                                                                  motion, and arts and culture promotion, and some others operating at the scale of the
                                                                  conurbation, notably the Passenger Transport Authority which oversees public transport
                                                                  provision. The formal government landscape is complex and cluttered, with many areas
                                                                  of overlapping responsibility.
                                                                     Local authority funds have come predominantly from central government and have
                                                                  been significantly constrained in recent years. Extra central government funds have
                                                                  been channelled through an array of special initiatives—for housing estate regeneration,
                                                                  area regeneration, overcoming social exclusion, education, healthcare, transport and
                                                                  safety and security. These have brought into conjoined actions in various arenas at differ-
                                                                  ent times agencies organized at metropolitan and regional scales. Central government
                                                                  activities are in part coordinated through a Government Office for the Region (GO.NE)
                                                                  With the possibility of regional devolution and an elected regional assembly in
                                                                  prospect, the region also has a Regional Assembly of elected representatives from the
                                                                  different local authorities.12 Outside the organization of politics and administration,
                                                                  business groupings have consolidated what were dispersed chambers of commerce and
                                                                  lobby groups into a regional Chamber of Trade and Industry. Throughout all these
                                                                  recent changes, and despite some personnel changes, some kind of “governing elite”
                                                                  can be identified, still largely associated with the old industrial politics, dominated by
                                                                  trades unions, a paternalist mode of governance, and focused primarily on poverty
                                                                  reduction and economic development.13
                                                                     In terms of governance, metropolitan city councils in England remain major political
                                                                  actors within this complex governance landscape in which sectorally-organized policy
                                                                  communities and their networks encounter each other but remain driven by their own
                                                                  logics. City councils are themselves multifunctional organizations, with several depart-
                                                                  ments linked to functional service delivery tasks, and with tensions in inter-departmental
                                                                  linkages. Within the Newcastle area, the councils vary in the extent to which it has been
                                                                  possible to develop and maintain a strategic and coordinated approach to city council
                                                                                                                            Transforming Governance        309

                                                                  organization. There have also been initiatives in all councils for devolution to sub-areas, a
                                                                  movement encouraged currently by central government’s proposals for “modernizing”
                                                                  local government, which advocates the creation of “area committees” (DETR, 1998;
                                                                  Coaffee & Healey, 2003). The creation of a council-wide system of area committees,
                                                                  however, challenges traditions of ward politics and a whole array of special area develop-
                                                                  ment initiatives pursued in different neighbourhoods over the past 30 years. Politically,
                                                                  Newcastle City Council seeks to operate as a strong collective actor, with the territorial
                                                                  scale expressed primarily in terms of political and administrative legitimacy rather than
                                                                  any sense of the specific relations and qualities to be found in the city.
                                                                     The three examples selected are all within the area of Newcastle City Council itself. In
                                                                  terms of economic and social life, the boundaries of the city council area have little
                                                                  meaning. But in terms of the connections between social and economic networks and
                                                                  political ones, the impact of a territorial boundary can be considerable. Access to many




Downloaded by [University of Arizona] at 00:50 11 December 2012
                                                                  material resources allocated by the public sector and to negotiation over regulatory
                                                                  approvals requires some relationship with one or more parts of the city council. This is
                                                                  very obvious in the case of the Grainger Town Partnership.


                                                                  Revitalizing the Historic City Centre: The Grainger Town Partnership
                                                                  This Partnership was created to promote the physical, economic and social regeneration of
                                                                  the nineteenth century core of Newcastle city centre, which had been progressively under-
                                                                  mined by the development of new shopping complexes to the north in the 1960s and 1970s
                                                                  and the Metrocentre in an “edge city” location in neighbouring Gateshead, as well as river-
                                                                  side redevelopment for offices and leisure activities to the south. Initiated by conservation
                                                                  and urban design campaigners within and around the city council in the 1980s, the project
                                                                  grew into a regeneration project in order to attract substantial national government
                                                                  funding. In doing so, it had to widen the stakeholders involved to include business interests
                                                                  from the retailing, commercial and property sectors. This was done through the regional
                                                                  Chamber of Commerce and a special business promotion agency, The Newcastle Initiat-
                                                                  ive. The funding streams to which it had access were in part channelled through regional
                                                                  bodies. But when the Partnership was formally created, it was in the form of an “arms-
                                                                  length” agency of the city council. This meant that the projects and practices of the
                                                                  Partnership were under continual challenge from city councillors and officers who felt
                                                                  their own autonomy threatened by the Partnership mechanism and the introduction of
                                                                  strong business partners. For both councillors and officers, the city centre as an area
                                                                  focus had traditionally been of less interest than the poor neighbourhoods to the east
                                                                  and west, which were the heartlands of traditional working class support for councillors
                                                                  and the centre of the council’s role as a housing provider.
                                                                     The Partnership in its formal lifetime (1997 –2003) achieved substantial physical
                                                                  improvements in Newcastle city centre, helped by the uplift in property markets regionally
                                                                  and the trend in city centre living among young professionals in the UK. Those involved,
                                                                  from different segments of the business community, those concerned with conservation
                                                                  and design as well as the increasing numbers of residents, not only came to appreciate
                                                                  the area focus of the Partnership but valued the consultative style pursued by the Partner-
                                                                  ship, which developed an array of mechanisms for consultation with different groups. The
                                                                  Partnership drew on and drew in a number of different networks into its governance arena.
                                                                  It also helped to create social-political networks. These could have some influence on the
                                                                  310   P. Healey

                                                                  fine detail of programme development and delivery. The author’s research also shows that
                                                                  the interchanges between actors located in different positions led to a considerably
                                                                  enhanced understanding of the dilemmas which had to be faced in managing the
                                                                  complex socio-physical interactions of the city centre public realm. But the knowledge
                                                                  resources and networks generated through the Partnership were not so easily diffused
                                                                  from the Partnership arena to the wider relations of local area management in Newcastle.
                                                                  Nor was it clear how much of the Partnership style and focus would survive as it was
                                                                  “folded” back into the city council in 2003, as the main extra funding came to an end,
                                                                  a typical experience of the preceding urban regeneration partnerships in the city.
                                                                     In terms of power dynamics, this episode depended on the nature of the funding avail-
                                                                  able to the Partnership. Without the national funding, it is unlikely that a project of this
                                                                  scale would have taken place and an area-focused Partnership form for the city centre
                                                                  created. The project challenged the geographical imagination which councillors had of




Downloaded by [University of Arizona] at 00:50 11 December 2012
                                                                  the city, which encompassed electorally-significant neighbourhoods in poverty which
                                                                  needed re-distributive attention, while the city centre was the territory of commercial
                                                                  interests which, it was assumed, could look after themselves and even generate funds
                                                                  for the city council. Significant regulatory responsibilities (planning and environmental
                                                                  health) remained in the hands of the city council, and these arenas were used to challenge
                                                                  Partnership proposals. In this case, the authority derived from governance culture and
                                                                  formal government process was used to maintain clear boundaries between the Partnership
                                                                  and the Council, generating all kinds of resistances to the flow of ideas and practices into
                                                                  the Council (see Figure 3). Other pressures were acting on the Council to introduce a new
                                                                  mode of politics, to encourage a much more open and consultative relationship with
                                                                  citizens generally and all kinds of stakeholders, generating a momentum which could
                                                                  not be avoided. But these pressures bore into the Council from different directions and
                                                                  cannot be attributed to the impact of the Grainger Town Partnership (see the next case).
                                                                  Thus the Grainger Town Partnership created an effective but contained and temporary
                                                                  arena in the Newcastle governance landscape. It innovated a strong focus on the area of
                                                                  the city centre and attempted to introduce a new kind of consultative politics, but in the
                                                                  end its power base was too weak to expand and endure. However, it has left behind
                                                                  tensions as many stakeholders valued its presence and argue for some continuation.




                                                                  Figure 3. Transformation initiatives in governance dynamics: Grainger Town Partnership (GTP)
                                                                                                                               Transforming Governance        311

                                                                  A Strategic Initiative: “Going for Growth”
                                                                  For many years, the city council (in its political and administrative activities) was held
                                                                  together by a strong pragmatic leader,14 backed by a group of senior councillors and
                                                                  heads of departments. Council practices were structured by service delivery functions,
                                                                  in which councillors played an important role as “patrons” to the residents in their
                                                                  wards, particularly helping to solve their housing problems. In the mid-1990s, the
                                                                  leader was forced out. In the past 10 years, the Council has struggled to develop a new
                                                                  direction and mode of operation. A new Chief Executive, with a background in manage-
                                                                  ment strategy, backed by some councillors, recognized the value of having a clear over-
                                                                  arching strategy for the city. This could provide a focus for political decisions, coordinate
                                                                  the activities of the various council departments and position the Council as in the
                                                                  forefront of the post-1997 national Labour government’s agenda for “modernizing”




Downloaded by [University of Arizona] at 00:50 11 December 2012
                                                                  local government. Such a strategic initiative represented a break with the pragmatic
                                                                  past, when a clear strategy was considered a hostage to fortune in the shifting sands of
                                                                  national and local politics and funding opportunities.
                                                                     The result was the production of a strategy known as “Going for Growth” (NCC, 2000).
                                                                  This was articulated by a core group within the Council. It was based on the assumption
                                                                  that the problems the Council faced were well-understood, after years of small-scale
                                                                  regeneration attempts in different parts of the city. The city’s population was falling.
                                                                  More affluent families were leaving for the surrounding areas, leading to a concentration
                                                                  of an already large number of poorer families, badly affected by a long history of tempor-
                                                                  ary and then permanent unemployment. Council income was falling, while the problems it
                                                                  had to address were increasing. In addition, its large stock of “council housing”, along with
                                                                  other parts of the low cost housing stock, were increasingly affected by disrepair and aban-
                                                                  donment. There was plenty of space, on “brownfield land”, within the city for housing to
                                                                  accommodate more people. But the social character of many parts of the city had under-
                                                                  mined many past attempts at improving and diversifying both the housing stock and the
                                                                  social life of neighbourhoods. The solution, in the words of the Strategy, was to turn
                                                                  around population decline and promote large scale redevelopment within the poorer
                                                                  neighbourhoods. This in effect meant demolition of some streets and the creation of
                                                                  new neighbourhood environments with a different (and more middle class) ambience.
                                                                     The Strategy was discussed with some elite stakeholders15 in the city, who were pleased
                                                                  to see a more strategic focus and interested in the potential for new development areas,
                                                                  especially if backed by national government funds. After a brief consultation exercise
                                                                  on the Strategy in 1999, the Council then commissioned “master plan” studies for the
                                                                  two main areas for comprehensive redevelopment. These were produced in mid-2000.
                                                                  A more intensive consultation exercise followed. At this point, residents in these neigh-
                                                                  bourhoods, many of whom had been involved in council regeneration initiatives before
                                                                  and who expected a reasonably close relation with their ward councillors, exploded in
                                                                  protest (Byrne, 2000; Healey, 2002; Cameron, 2003). In part, this was due to the
                                                                  content of the masterplans. Residents were worried about road proposals which seemed
                                                                  to turn some streets into major highways. They were anxious about their houses,
                                                                  fearing demolition, especially if they had spent a good deal on interior decoration,
                                                                  despite the abandonment going on around them. In any case, the neighbourhoods were
                                                                  already very diverse with different qualities in different streets. But above all, they felt dis-
                                                                  connected from the processes which had produced the masterplans. They too understood
                                                                  312   P. Healey

                                                                  the problems. They were living with them on a day-to-day basis. What they demanded was
                                                                  to be “part of the solution”. Especially, they resented the lack of consultation with them
                                                                  about their futures. They were challenging the Council’s mode of governance as much
                                                                  as the content of the strategies.
                                                                     Well-orchestrated citizen protest led to a fundamental re-think within the Council. The
                                                                  overall Strategy was retained, but the Strategy Team shifted attention to engage in very
                                                                  detailed consultations with residents through which new plans were produced and new
                                                                  ways of understanding the plans developed. Thus a new mode of politics began to
                                                                  emerge, with the Strategy used as the basis for obtaining substantial government
                                                                  funding for urban regeneration. But by 2003, many of the senior councillors and officers
                                                                  actors involved in the “Going for Growth” initiative had left the Council. Some of the
                                                                  elements of the Strategy are rolling forward, backed by national government money.
                                                                  Some of the consultative practices have spread into other areas of the Council’s work.




Downloaded by [University of Arizona] at 00:50 11 December 2012
                                                                  But at this moment, the Council is once again in re-organization, the outcome of which
                                                                  is not yet clear. The struggle here lies within the Council, over modes of politics and,
                                                                  implicitly, over concepts of the city and over the priorities which should underpin
                                                                  Council strategy and programmes. Collective actor capacity in terms of relations with
                                                                  other stakeholders and with other government levels is continually undermined by this
                                                                  uncertainty (see Figure 4).
                                                                     The “Going for Growth” initiative can be interpreted as an attempt to “upscale” the
                                                                  horizons of councillors and officers of the city council, to focus attention on the city as
                                                                  a whole, and the wider picture affecting options for action and the coordination of
                                                                  effort across departments. It was very much encouraged by the wider climate of local
                                                                  government “modernization” as well as the building up of an emphasis on the wider
                                                                  “region”. Key actors in the Council sought to position themselves in this wider discourse
                                                                  and arena. But to do this, they had to change the mode of operation of local politics, par-
                                                                  ticularly the relations between citizen and councillor, and the internal organization of the
                                                                  council, which had operated in the past very much through individual service fiefdoms.
                                                                  But in attempting to make this kind of shift, they initially neglected to consider the relation
                                                                  between citizen and state, particularly among the councillors’ heartland voters in the poor
                                                                  neighbourhoods. Since 2000, the Council has set up Local Strategic Partnerships and Area




                                                                         Figure 4. Transformation initiatives in governance dynamics: “Going for Growth”
                                                                                                                              Transforming Governance        313

                                                                  Committees, following national guidance, and has sought a much more consultative
                                                                  relationship with residents, in effect the kind of mode of politics promoted in the Grainger
                                                                  Town Partnership and in earlier partnerships in the area. But how far this will protect the
                                                                  politicians from electoral challenge from Liberal Democrats,16 and how far either party
                                                                  will continue to sustain an “upscaled” strategic approach and a deeply consultative
                                                                  relationship with residents, remains to be seen. Transformation in governance discourses
                                                                  and practices is a long process with many “folds” and “bends”.


                                                                  Mobilization Outside the State: The Ouseburn Trust
                                                                  Within the UK, the state in the form of national and local government bodies, is a very strong
                                                                  presence. This has meant that governance initiatives outside the state have had difficulties
                                                                  growing and surviving without finding a way to link to formal government in some way.




Downloaded by [University of Arizona] at 00:50 11 December 2012
                                                                  This issue is currently being examined in relation to “social economy” and related initiatives
                                                                  in an EU F5 project led by Frank Moulaert (SINGOCOM). The final example is drawn from
                                                                  this work (Gonzalez & Healey, 2005). The Ouseburn Valley is an area of the city between
                                                                  the city centre, poor neighbourhoods to the east, and an area of intensive riverside redeve-
                                                                  lopment initiated in the late 1980s. It is a typical “in-between” part of the city, with old
                                                                  industrial buildings being used for various workshops, some ecological projects, and pubs
                                                                  which attracted a distinctive “alternative” clientele, all clustered down the sides of a steep
                                                                  valley, making it a curious and attractive physical locale.
                                                                     The initiative which turned this “in-between” place into an active “place-for-itself” was
                                                                  sparked off by mobilization “against the state”. A group of local people, including
                                                                  someone from the local church, organized first to demand a voice in the major redevelop-
                                                                  ment of the riverside area, so that the Ouseburn Valley area would not be cut-off from the
                                                                  main riverside. Success in this mobilization gained them the status to become active
                                                                  participants in the ongoing consultation process which developed around the riverside
                                                                  regeneration projects. This focus soon widened out to include people concerned with
                                                                  industrial heritage and environmental issues, neither of which were well-articulated
                                                                  policy issues in the city council, where the focus had long been on “housing” and
                                                                  “jobs”. By 1996, these various networks around the Ouseburn area had become consoli-
                                                                  dated into a formalized Trust. They then widened out further to involve other community,
                                                                  business and local groups and the city council, forming a Partnership which obtained
                                                                  modest funding from central government for development activities. This funding finished
                                                                  in 2002, and the Trust now survives with a more permanent link to the city council,
                                                                  employing four officers seconded from the city council in the Ouseburn Resource
                                                                  Centre in the area, dealing with several development projects.
                                                                     The trajectory of this initiative is not unlike the Grainger Town Partnership (see
                                                                  Figure 5). It started off through an activist campaign around neglected issues, developed
                                                                  a wider agenda in order to participate in government opportunities for consultation and
                                                                  funding, became more formalized, and then was absorbed more closely into the city
                                                                  council organization, where its future has to jostle with many other commitments and
                                                                  organizational arenas, and will depend on both the commitment of a few activists and
                                                                  how well the initiative “fits” the prevailing interests of local and national politicians
                                                                  and officials. It has created a “place identity” which has filtered into the consciousness
                                                                  of both government actors and local people. To safeguard as much autonomy as possible,
                                                                  the Trust has set out to acquire some land and buildings. It has also built links to a range of
                                                                  314   P. Healey




Downloaded by [University of Arizona] at 00:50 11 December 2012
                                                                         Figure 5. Transformation initiatives in governance dynamics: the Ouseburn Trust


                                                                  national agencies. It has been a local pioneer for a fine-grained, ecologically-sensitive and
                                                                  consultative approach to project development, which is in line with much national think-
                                                                  ing but challenges Council traditions. It thus provides an exemplar of a new way of doing
                                                                  things, but, as with the Grainger Town Project, has had little wider impact on Council
                                                                  discourses and practices, except perhaps as a demonstration project of “downscaling”
                                                                  governance activity and what a new mode of local, socially-driven entrepreneurial
                                                                  development might look like. Nor has it made links to a wider “movement politics”
                                                                  which could have enlarged its scope of influence.


                                                                  Struggles for Change
                                                                  These “cameos” of governance activity in and around Newcastle City Council all seem to
                                                                  suggest the continuing capacity of a local council to resist change and to undermine the
                                                                  innovative potential of experiments in new government forms. Yet the content of these
                                                                  pressures and the initiatives, conflicts and struggles they give rise to are not the same as
                                                                  they were in the 1970s or even the neo-liberal 1980s. The context of power dynamics,
                                                                  funding, demands and expectations is different. The terrain of invention and struggle is
                                                                  different. The interpretation is that, drawing on Figure 1, the level of governance processes
                                                                  in Newcastle is “in movement”, particularly since the change of leadership in the mid-
                                                                  1990s (Coaffee & Healey, 2003). What is unclear is the trajectory of this movement,
                                                                  and whether it will ever come to “rest” in any kind of stable set of networks and coalitions,
                                                                  discourses and practices.
                                                                     Within this “movement”, there are some signs of a re-scaling of focus, from political
                                                                  wards and social housing neighbourhoods, and the promotion of the city’s direct interests
                                                                  in land, property and its income base, both upwards to its wider role as a city in a region
                                                                  and downwards to neighbourhoods and locales within the city. The “Going for Growth”
                                                                  experience shows that this double re-scaling cannot be achieved without equivalent atten-
                                                                  tion to residents’ concerns, particularly in the political heartland poor neighbourhoods.
                                                                  There are initiatives underway to develop a more systematic approach to absorbing resi-
                                                                  dents’ views into the shaping and delivery of Council policies (the Area Committees etc.).
                                                                  But this brings different arenas in different locales within the city into clear conflict with
                                                                                                                             Transforming Governance        315

                                                                  each other, whereas in the old days of councillor patronage, it was the councillors who
                                                                  struggled in the City Council Chamber on behalf of their ward constituents. The acute
                                                                  tension for city council politicians and managers is how to manage the shift going on in
                                                                  its broader socio-economic context, which is bringing many more middle class people
                                                                  to work and live in the city and thereby over time potentially changing both policy priori-
                                                                  ties and modes of politics. Can a city council transform itself without struggle and crisis?
                                                                  Or are these essential ingredients for “unlocking” the inertia of “old ways”? Certainly,
                                                                  Newcastle City Council has been experimenting in all kinds of ways, which at least
                                                                  provides an experience on which to draw if and when the various strands of initiative
                                                                  come together into a “new way” of doing governance in the city. But inevitably, such
                                                                  a transformation will and should involve struggle, as it would re-distribute access to
                                                                  resources flows, regulatory practices and the formulation of policy ideas.




Downloaded by [University of Arizona] at 00:50 11 December 2012
                                                                  Conclusions
                                                                  The rhetoric of the well-publicized initiatives in urban and regional governance “moderni-
                                                                  zation” in Europe provides many indications of an emphasis on new scales for the articu-
                                                                  lation of policy and politics, for the emergence of a territorial focus and for the
                                                                  development of new modes of more collaborative governance. But a fine-grained and
                                                                  institutionally-situated examination of such initiatives, such as those described in the pre-
                                                                  vious section, suggests that whether and how far these practices develop is highly variable
                                                                  and contingent on local particularities (see also Le Gales, 2002; Swyngedouw, 2005).
                                                                     In relation to re-scaling, the Newcastle governance case suggests that the old power of
                                                                  the city council is under serious challenge, with a strengthening possible at both the
                                                                  regional and the sub-municipal level. But the arena of the metropolitan district remains
                                                                  important, both in terms of the articulation of formal politics, and the organization of
                                                                  policy and administration. That this power is constrained by national government regula-
                                                                  tory and resource allocation power has been a long-standing feature of central-local
                                                                  government relations in Britain, and shows few signs of abating as yet in England. It
                                                                  remains to be seen whether new regional levels emerge with real power to act “for them-
                                                                  selves” rather than operate as creatures of central government, or local government, or
                                                                  both (Jeffrey et al., 2002; Murdoch & Norton, 2001). The continuing strength of city coun-
                                                                  cils in England lies in part in the range of functions they still perform and in part in their
                                                                  well-established legitimacy and authority. But it also lies in the expectations that others
                                                                  have of “the Council”. Residents and business interests may be very critical, and may com-
                                                                  plain of the distance between local government and citizen, but yet they expect councils to
                                                                  “do things” for them and often wrap together a whole array of government bodies as an
                                                                  imagined collective “council”. Structural imperatives for both more efficiency and more
                                                                  open and participative democratic processes challenge traditional practices, but do not
                                                                  necessarily encourage the re-formulation of scalar relations.
                                                                     This raises the question of territorial focus. Curiously, and despite the “Going for
                                                                  Growth” initiative, the institutional arena of Newcastle City Council has a very uncertain
                                                                  conception of Newcastle as a place. This vagueness about territorial qualities is shared
                                                                  with many other organizations in the city (Vigar et al., 2005). The city council is
                                                                  clearly a powerful collective actor, but the city as a territory is only implicitly present.
                                                                  For politicians, councillors, citizens and other stakeholders, the Council is a collection
                                                                  of service departments, not an aggregation of distinctive locales or a locale in and for
                                                                  316   P. Healey

                                                                  itself. This is probably true of many other city councils in the UK. In such a context, the
                                                                  rhetoric of “joined-up government” and of “integrated governance” promoted by the UK
                                                                  national government in the late 1990s and early 2000s finds difficulty in transferring to an
                                                                  actual practice. Where it does so, the focus tends to be on the needs of individuals and firms
                                                                  in locales, rather than on the qualities of places, that is, developing a voice for people-in-
                                                                  places. The current initiatives in integrated council strategy and in area/neighbourhood gov-
                                                                  ernment may have the effect of creating new policy spaces in which a new politics with a
                                                                  strong “territorial focus” will emerge, but there is no clear evidence for such a development
                                                                  at present in Newcastle.
                                                                     The pressures for a more consultative and collaborative style of policy-making from
                                                                  residents is clear in the Newcastle case. In fact, the experience of area regeneration part-
                                                                  nerships in the past had encouraged the demand for “voice” in the poorer neighbourhoods
                                                                  (Coaffee & Healey, 2003). This is challenging the old paternalist and quasi-clientelist




Downloaded by [University of Arizona] at 00:50 11 December 2012
                                                                  practices of councillors and the delivery modes of officials. But councillors and officers
                                                                  have also to adjust to the demands of central government to perform according to a “best
                                                                  value” target-driven performance regime, which gives little space for transforming
                                                                  citizen-state relations in significant ways (Stewart, 2002). Caught in this structural
                                                                  tension, initiatives in more intensive resident consultation are driven by the search to
                                                                  underpin the authority of council attempts at strategy with the legitimacy of “deep
                                                                  consultation”, but residents are often well-aware that the council needs the consultation
                                                                  for its own purposes rather than as part of a shift in power relations between council
                                                                  and citizen.
                                                                     In the Newcastle case, therefore, my analysis suggests that governance processes are
                                                                  “on the move”. This conclusion is made not because of the array of new initiatives of
                                                                  all kinds, but because, at the level of government process (see Figure 1), the mixture of
                                                                  attempts to manage and resist the changes set in motion by the new initiatives and the
                                                                  general sense of uncertainty (reflected in regular re-organization attempts) suggests a dif-
                                                                  fused sense of the need to change. But what kind of trajectory will emerge remains very
                                                                  unclear, and is still strongly dependent on a central – local government power dynamic. In
                                                                  this dynamic, some business interests and residents in some neighbourhoods may gain, but
                                                                  a new inclusive “politics of space” which could provide a voice for people across the city
                                                                  in relation to the different needs, lifestyles and their different locales of living seems a long
                                                                  way off. This case thus confirms Le Gales’ general conclusion for urban governance
                                                                  in Europe that some kind of transformation is underway (2002, pp. 276 –273), but that
                                                                  as analysts we should be careful of deterministic over-generalization.
                                                                     A possible “over-generalization” of the Newcastle case could be that the city council
                                                                  level is slowly “dis-integrating” its established departmentalized organization and patern-
                                                                  alist mode of politics. It may be losing power as a new regional scale begins to institutio-
                                                                  nalize. In which case, this could be an example of de-stabilization prior to a new and
                                                                  re-scaled territorial integration. Such an integration, in the particular context of the
                                                                  north-east of England, where there is a long-standing awareness of economic vulner-
                                                                  ability, is likely to focus on territory as a “container” of economic assets, favouring
                                                                  business interests directly in order to win “jobs” to favour the traditional north-east
                                                                  worker. However, how far a new arena will be able to accumulate sufficient force to
                                                                  challenge the embedded practices of central – local relations and whether a concept of
                                                                  territory will emerge which is more than a “container” remain very uncertain potentials
                                                                  at the present time. In 10 years time, analysts may conclude that the Newcastle governance
                                                                                                                                           Transforming Governance                317

                                                                  story is one of continual transformation, of an unending and “restless search” (Offe, 1977)
                                                                  for a stable resolution to contradictory structural imperatives and historically-embedded
                                                                  discourses and practices. The analytical tools summarized in this paper are put forward
                                                                  to help both in assessing these evolutions of “governance on the move” and as aids to
                                                                  those actively involved in struggles for transformation.




                                                                  Notes
                                                                      1. This paper is a revised version of one given at the 54th Meeting of German Geographers in Bern,
                                                                         28 September–4 October, 2003. Workshop FS26: New Urban Governance—Institutional Change and
                                                                         Consequences for Urban Development.




Downloaded by [University of Arizona] at 00:50 11 December 2012
                                                                      2. The author and colleagues have been developing such intermediate tools through empirical research on
                                                                         planning and urban regeneration experiences (Healey & Barrett, 1990; Healey, 1992, 1998, 2004a;
                                                                         Healey et al., 2003).
                                                                      3. There are many critiques of Giddens’ structuration theory [see, for example Seidman (1998) and Thrift
                                                                         (1996)], but the basic conception of the mutual constitution of “structure” and “agency” remains a very
                                                                         helpful approach.
                                                                      4. See, for example, Flyvberg (1998), Harding (2000), Healey et al. (2003), Hillier (2000), Murdoch and
                                                                         Abram (2002), Raco (2003).
                                                                      5. See Innes and Booher (2003), Healey (2004a), Hajer (2003). In developing their concepts of “institutio-
                                                                         nalization”, Gromart and Hajer (2003) have recently been drawing on some of the concepts in the socio-
                                                                         technical systems literature with its particular conceptions of actor-networks involved in the formation of
                                                                         knowledge and technology, and with the capacity of this knowledge to “travel” from one institutional
                                                                         arena to another when “black-boxed” into a discursive metaphor, a technique or a procedure (see also
                                                                         Murdoch & Abram, 2002).
                                                                      6. Figure 1 in effect provides a way to express the structure/agency relation, often expressed by others in
                                                                         terms of linking macro-, meso- and micro-levels of power. See also Fischer (2003) for a similar con-
                                                                         ception of levels.
                                                                      7. “Capital” suggests that different resources can be agglomerated into a unitary currency, which is not the
                                                                         author’s view.
                                                                      8. See Healey et al. (2002, 2003). The author would also like to thank collaborators, Claudio de Magalhaes,
                                                                         Ali Madanipour and John Pendlebury, and to the ESRC, who financed project R000222616.
                                                                      9. See Coaffee and Healey (2003). The author would also like to thank collaborators Jon Coaffee and ESRC
                                                                         Ph.D. student Lorraine Johnstone.
                                                                     10. The author would like to thank colleagues Sara Gonzalez and Geoff Vigar, and EU F5 SINGOCOM
                                                                         project leader Frank Moulaert, for permission to use this material.
                                                                     11. The Newcastle area was selected not because it has a striking history of governance transformation but
                                                                         because, through the various research projects conducted there by the author and colleagues in SAPL/
                                                                         GURU, the author has a rich understanding of its governance dynamics.
                                                                     12. Under recent legislation, regions can set up political assemblies with powers “in between” those avail-
                                                                         able to Wales and Scotland, if a majority of local voters support this in a referendum, which will also
                                                                         convert all local authorities into a single administrative layer (i.e. abolishing either counties or districts
                                                                         where a two-tier system still exists). The first referendum was held in the North East region in November
                                                                         2004 and was heavily defeated.
                                                                     13. The opportunity of the recent and ultimately unsuccessful “Cultural Capital of Europe” bid helped to
                                                                         enrich this traditional pre-occupation, but was continually justified in the language of job creation and
                                                                         social inclusion.
                                                                     14. In the UK, the Leader of the Council has traditionally been the important political figure, the mayor being
                                                                         a ceremonial position. As part of the “modernization” of local government, there is an encouragement for
                                                                         new, more powerful elected mayors, as in the London case.
                                                                     15. Especially from other public agencies and commercial interests.
                                                                     16. It dit not. The Liberal Democrats gained control of the city council in May 2004.
                                                                  318    P. Healey

                                                                  References
                                                                  Albrechts, L., Alden, J. & da Rosa Pires, A. (Eds) (2001) The Changing Institutional Landscape of Planning
                                                                        (Aldershot: Ashgate).
                                                                  Albrechts, L., Healey, P. & Kunzmann, K. (2003) strategic spatial planning and regional governance in Europe.
                                                                        Journal of the American Planning Association, 69(2), pp. 113– 129.
                                                                  Amin, A. & Hausner, J. (Eds) (1997) Beyond Market and Hierarchy: Inter-active Governance and Social
                                                                        Complexity (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar).
                                                                  Amin, A. & Thrift, N. (1995) Globalisation, institutional thickness and the local economy in: P. Healey,
                                                                        S. Cameron, S. Davoudi, S. Graham & A. Madanipour (Eds) Managing Cities, pp. 91–108 (Chichester:
                                                                        John Wiley).
                                                                  Booher, D. & Innes, J. (2002) Network power for collaborative planning, Journal of Planning Education and
                                                                        Research, 21, pp. 221–236.
                                                                  Brenner, N. (1999) Globalisation as reterritorialisation: The re-scaling of urban governance in the European
                                                                        Union, Urban Studies, 36(3), pp. 431 –452.




Downloaded by [University of Arizona] at 00:50 11 December 2012
                                                                  Bryson, J. & Crosby, B. (1992) Leadership in the Common Good: Tackling Public Problems in a Shared Power
                                                                        World (San Francisco, CA: Jossey Bass).
                                                                  Byrne, D. (2000) Newcastle’s Going for Growth: Governance and planning in a post-industrial metropolis,
                                                                        Northern Economic Review, Spring/Summer, 30, pp. 3–16.
                                                                  Cameron, S. (2003) Gentrification, housing redifferentiation and urban regeneration: Going for Growth in
                                                                        Newcastle upon Tyne, Urban Studies, 40(12), pp. 2367–2382.
                                                                  Carley, M. (2000) Urban partnerships, governance and the regeneration of Britains cities, International Planning
                                                                        Studies, 5(3), pp. 273 –298.
                                                                  Cars, G., Healey, P., Madanipour A., et al. (Eds) (2002) Urban Governance, Institutional Capacity and Social
                                                                        Milieux (Aldershot: Ashgate).
                                                                  Castells, M. (1977) The Urban Question (London: Edward Arnold).
                                                                  Castells, M. (1996) The Rise of the Network Society (Oxford: Blackwell).
                                                                  Coaffee, J. & Healey, P. (2003) My voice: My place: Tracking transformations in urban governance, Urban
                                                                        Studies, 40(10), pp. 1979–1999.
                                                                  Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions (DETR) (1998) Modern Local Government: In Touch
                                                                        with People (London: DETR).
                                                                  Dyrberg, T. B. (1997) The Circular Structure of Power (London: Verso).
                                                                  Easton, D. (1965) A Systems Analysis of Political Life (New York: John Wiley).
                                                                  Fischer, F. (2003) Reframing Public Policy: Discursive Politics and Deliberative Practices (Oxford: Oxford
                                                                        University Press).
                                                                  Flyvberg, B. (1998) Rationality and Power (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press).
                                                                  Fürst, D. & Kneilung, J. (2002) Regional Governance: New Modes of Self-government in the European Commu-
                                                                        nity (Hannover: ARL, University of Hannover).
                                                                  Giddens, A. (1984) The Constitution of Society (Cambridge: Policy Press).
                                                                  Gonzalez, S. & Healey, P. (2005) A sociological institutionalist approach to the study of innovation in governance
                                                                        capacity, Urban Studies, 42(11), pp. 2055–2070.
                                                                  Gromart, E. & Hajer, M. (2003) Is That Politics? For an inquiry into forms of contemporary politics, in: B.
                                                                        Joerges & H. Nowotny (Eds) Looking Back, Ahead—The (2002) Yearbook of the Sociology of Sciences
                                                                        (Dordrecht: Kluwer).
                                                                  Hajer, M. (1995) The Politics of Environmental Discourse (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
                                                                  Hajer, M. (2003) A frame in the fields: Policymaking and the reinvention of politics, in: M. Hajer & H. Wagenaar
                                                                        (Eds) Deliberative Policy Analysis: Understanding Governance in the Network Society, pp. 88– 110
                                                                        (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
                                                                  Hajer, M. & Wagenaar, H. (Eds) (2003) Deliberative Policy Analysis: Understanding Governance in the Network
                                                                        Society (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
                                                                  Hall, P. & Taylor, R. (1996) Political science and the three institutionalisms, Political Studies, XLIV(5),
                                                                        pp. 936 –957.
                                                                  Harding, A. (2000) Regime formation in Manchester and Edinburgh, in: G. Stoker (Ed.) The New Politics of
                                                                        British Local Governance, pp. 54–71 (Houndmills: Macmillan).
                                                                  Harvey, D. (1989) From managerialism to entrepreneurialism: The formation of urban governance in late
                                                                        capitalism, Geografisker Annaler, 71B, pp. 3–17.
                                                                                                                                          Transforming Governance               319

                                                                  Hastings, A. (1996) Unravelling the process of partnership in urban regeneration policy, Urban Studies, 33,
                                                                       pp. 253 –268.
                                                                  Healey, P. (1992) An institutional model of the development process. Journal of Property Research, 9(1), pp. 33–44.
                                                                  Healey, P. (1997a) Collaborative Planning: Shaping Places in Fragmented Societies (London: Macmillan).
                                                                  Healey, P. (1997b) Mandarins, city fathers and neighbours: Crossing old divides in new partnerships, in:
                                                                       O. Kalltorp, I. Elander, O. Ericsson & M. Franzen (Eds) Cities in Transformation:Transformation
                                                                       in Cities, pp. 266–288 (Aldershot: Avebury).
                                                                  Healey, P. (1998) Building institutional capacity through collaborative approaches to urban planning, Environ-
                                                                       ment and Planning A, 30(9), pp. 1531– 1456.
                                                                  Healey, P. (1999) Institutionalist analysis, communicative planning and shaping places, Journal of Planning
                                                                       Education and Research, 19(2), pp. 111 –122.
                                                                  Healey, P. (2002) Place, identity and governance: Transforming discourses and practices, in: J. Hillier &
                                                                       E. Rooksby (Eds) Habitus: A sense of place, pp. 173–202 (Aldershot: Avebury).
                                                                  Healey, P. (2004) The treatment of space and place in the new strategic planning in Europe, International Journal
                                                                       of Urban and Regional Research, 28(1), pp. 45–67.




Downloaded by [University of Arizona] at 00:50 11 December 2012
                                                                  Healey, P. (2006) The new institutionalism and the transformative goals of planning, in: N. Verma (Ed.) Planning
                                                                       and Institutions (New Brunswick, NJ: Center for Urban Policy Research).
                                                                  Healey, P. & Barrett, S. M. (1990) Structure and agency in land and property development processes, Urban
                                                                       Studies, 27(1), pp. 89–104.
                                                                  Healey, P., de Magalhaes, C., Madanipour, A. & Pendlebury, J. (2002) Shaping City Centre Futures: Conserva-
                                                                       tion, Regeneration and Institutional Capacity (Newcastle upon Tyne: Centre for Research in European
                                                                       Urban Environments, University of Newcastle).
                                                                  Healey, P., de Magalhaes, C., Madanipour, A. & Pendlebury, J. (2003) Place, identity and local politics: Analys-
                                                                       ing partnership initiatives, in: M. Hajer & H. Wagenaar (Eds) Deliberative Policy Analysis: Understanding
                                                                       Governance in the Network Society, pp. 60–87 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
                                                                  Herrschel, T. & Newman, P. (2002) Governance of Europes City Regions: Planning, Policy and Politics
                                                                       (London: Routledge).
                                                                  Hillier, J. (2000) Going round the back: Complex networks and informal action in local planning processes,
                                                                       Environment and Planning A, 32(1), pp. 33–54.
                                                                  Innes, J. & Booher, D. (2003) Collaborrative policy-making: Knowledge through dialogue, in: M. Hajer &
                                                                       H. Wagenaar (Eds) Deliberative Policy Analysis: Understanding Governance in the Network Society,
                                                                       pp. 33 –59 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
                                                                  Imrie, R. & Raco, M. (1999) How new is the new local governance?, Transactions of the Institute of British
                                                                       Geographers, 24(1), pp. 45 –63.
                                                                  Jeffrey, C., Mawson, J., et al. (2002) Special Issue: Devolution and the English Regions, Regional Studies, 36(7),
                                                                       pp. 15 –810.
                                                                  Jessop, B. (1998) The narrative of enterprise and the enterprise of narrative: Place marketing and the entrepre-
                                                                       neurial city, in: T. Hall & P. Hubbard (Eds) The Entrepreneurial City: Geographies of Politics, Regime
                                                                       and Representation, pp. 77 –99 (London: John Wiley).
                                                                  Jessop, B. (2000) Governance failure, in: G. Stoker (Eds) The New Politics of Local Governance, pp. 11– 32
                                                                       (London: Macmillan).
                                                                  Jessop, B. (2002) Institutional re(turns) and the strategic-relational approach, Environment and Planning A, 33(7),
                                                                       pp. 1213–1235.
                                                                  John, P. (2001) Local Governance in Western Europe (London: Sage).
                                                                  Le Gales, P. (2002) European Cities: Social Conflicts and Governance (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
                                                                  Lowndes, V. & Skelcher, C. (1998) The dynamics of multi-organizational partnerships: An analysis of change in
                                                                       modes of governance, Public Administration, 76(2), pp. 313–333.
                                                                  MacLeod, G. (1999) Place, politics and scale dependence: Exploring the structuration of euro-regionalism,
                                                                       European Urban and Regional Studies, 6(3), pp. 231– 254.
                                                                  MacLeod, G. & Goodwin, M. (1999) Space, scale and state strategy: Towards a reinterpretation of contemporary
                                                                       urban and regional governance, Progress in Human Geography, 23(4), pp 503–529.
                                                                  Murdoch, J. & Abram, S. (2002) Rationalities of Planning: Development versus Environment in Planning for
                                                                       Housing (Aldershot: Ashgate).
                                                                  Murdoch, J. & Norton, A. (2001) Regionalisation and planning: Creating institutions and stakeholders in English
                                                                       regions, in: L. Albrechts, J. Alden & A. da Rosa Pires (Eds) The Changing Institutional Landscape of
                                                                       Planning, pp. 109– 132 (Aldershot: Ashgate).
                                                                  320    P. Healey

                                                                  Newcastle City Council (NCC) (2000) Going for Growth: A Citywide Vision for Newcastle 2020 (Newcastle upon
                                                                       Tyne: Newcastle City Council).
                                                                  Novarina, G. (Ed.) (2003) Plan et Projét: L’urbanisme en France et en Italie (Paris: Anthropos).
                                                                  Offe, C. (1977) The theory of the capitalist state and the problem of policy formation, in: L. N. Lindberg &
                                                                       A. Alford (Eds) Stress and Contradiction in Modern Capitalism, pp. 125 –144 (Lexington, MA: D.C.Heath).
                                                                  Painter, J. (1997) Regulation theory, regime and practice in urban politics, in: M. Lauria (Ed.) Reconstructing
                                                                       Urban Regime Theory: Regulating Politics in a Global Economy, pp. 122–143 (London: Sage).
                                                                  Peck, J. & Tickell, A. (1994) Too many partnerships, Local Economy, 9(8), pp. 251 –265.
                                                                  Peters, G. (1999) Institutional Theory in Political Science: The New Institutionalism (London: Continuum).
                                                                  Pierre, J. (Ed.) (1998) Partnerships in Urban Governance: European and American Experience (London:
                                                                       Macmillan).
                                                                  Powell, W. W. & Dimaggio, P. J. (Eds) (1991) The New Institutionalism in Organizational Analysis (Chicago, IL:
                                                                       University of Chicago Press).
                                                                  Raco, M. (2003) Assessing the discourses and practices of urban regeneration in a growing region, Geoforum,
                                                                       34(1), pp. 37 –55.




Downloaded by [University of Arizona] at 00:50 11 December 2012
                                                                  Salet, W. & Faludi, A. (Eds) (2000) The Revival of Strategic Spatial Planning (Amsterdam: Koninklijke Neder-
                                                                       landse Akademie van Wetenschappen [Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences])
                                                                  Salet, W., Thornley, A. & Kreukels, A. (Eds) (2003) Metropolitan Governance and Spatial Planning: Compara-
                                                                       tive Studies of European City-regions (London: E&FN Spon).
                                                                  Saunders, P. (1979) Urban Politics: A Sociological Interpretation (London: Hutchinson).
                                                                  Seidman, S. (1998) Contested Knowledge: Social Theory in the Post-modern Era (Oxford: Blackwell).
                                                                  Stewart, M. (2002) Compliance and collaboration in urban governance, G. Cars, P. Healey, A. Madanipour &
                                                                       C. de Magalhaes (Eds) Urban Governance, Institutional Capacity and Social Milieux, pp. 149– 167
                                                                       (Aldershot: Ashgate).
                                                                  Swyngedouw, E. (2005) Governance innovation and the citizen: the Janus-face of governance-beyond-the-state,
                                                                       Urban Studies, 42(11), pp. 1991–2006.
                                                                  Thrift, N. (1996) Spatial Formations (London: Sage).
                                                                  Vigar, G., Graham, S. & Healey, P. (2005) In search of the city in spatial strategies: past legacies and future
                                                                       imagining, Urban Studies, 42(8), pp. 1391– 1410.
