[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: journal/M17-faludi-2012-multi-level-territorial-governance-three-criticisms-10.1080-14649357.2012.677578.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Creator:         3B2 Total Publishing System 7.51a/W
Producer:        iText 4.2.0 by 1T3XT
CreationDate:    Wed May 23 16:15:11 2012 WIB
ModDate:         Thu Oct  9 04:38:51 2014 WIB
Custom Metadata: no
Metadata Stream: yes
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            AcroForm
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           16
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       539 x 709 pts
Page rot:        0
File size:       149310 bytes
Optimized:       no
PDF version:     1.4
[Extracted Text]
This article was downloaded by: [Kungliga Tekniska Hogskola]
On: 08 October 2014, At: 14:38
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office:
Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK



                                  Planning Theory & Practice
                                  Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription
                                  information:
                                  http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rptp20

                                  Multi-Level (Territorial) Governance: Three
                                  Criticisms
                                                   a
                                  Andreas Faludi
                                  a
                                   OTB Research Institute for the Built Environment, Delft University of
                                  Technology , The Netherlands
                                  Published online: 24 May 2012.




To cite this article: Andreas Faludi (2012) Multi-Level (Territorial) Governance: Three Criticisms , Planning
Theory & Practice, 13:2, 197-211, DOI: 10.1080/14649357.2012.677578

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14649357.2012.677578



PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the “Content”)
contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our
licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or
suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication
are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor &
Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently
verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any
losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities
whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or
arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial
or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or
distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use
can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions
                                                                      Planning Theory & Practice, Vol. 13, No. 2, 197–211, June 2012




                                                                      Multi-Level (Territorial) Governance:
                                                                      Three Criticisms1
                                                                      ANDREAS FALUDI
                                                                      OTB Research Institute for the Built Environment, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands




Downloaded by [Kungliga Tekniska Hogskola] at 14:38 08 October 2014
                                                                      ABSTRACT Multi-level territorial governance has entered European planning discourse, but is
                                                                      the term “territorial” actually redundant? After all, multi-level governance is already thought to
                                                                      refer to the interaction between nested territorial administrations. So could multi-level governance
                                                                      be criticised for giving more attention to the roles and positions of lower-levels in a multi-level
                                                                      polity rather than invoking a comprehensive concept of governance implicating non-governmental
                                                                      actors in policy making? And does the multi-level governance literature ignore the underlying
                                                                      metageography? Whether territories are accordingly fixed jurisdictions or malleable social
                                                                      constructs has implications for planning and beyond.

                                                                      Keywords: Multi-level governance; territory; territorialism

                                                                            Multi-level and geographically flexible territorial governance should be able to
                                                                            manage different functional territories and ensure the balanced and
                                                                            coordinated contribution of the local, regional, national, and European
                                                                            actors – such as authorities or governments—in compliance with the principle
                                                                            of subsidiary through systematic integration of territorial aspects. (Territorial
                                                                            State and Perspectives, 2011, p. 85)

                                                                            . . . even though many implementation networks are situated at the regional or
                                                                            local level, their boundaries often do not converge with administrative
                                                                            delineations. In addition, they are often of a more ephemeral nature . . . In
                                                                            that sense, functional need and not regional empowerment or federalism is the
                                                                            key concept. (Conzelmann, 2008, p. 26)
                                                                      “Multi-level and geographically flexible territorial governance” in the first quotation above
                                                                      can either mean that territorial governance is multi-level and flexible, or that there are two
                                                                      forms of territorial governance, one multi-level and one territorially flexible. The reach of
                                                                      the “authorities or governments” referred to is not flexible, so “geographically flexible
                                                                      territorial governance” must necessarily be a separate form. Indeed, according to the
                                                                      second quotation, relevant arrangements cut across administrative delineations. None-
                                                                      theless, multi-level governance is often interpreted in the first sense as the sharing of
                                                                      responsibilities in a multi-level polity. The Committee of the Regions (2009) thus talks about
                                                                      it in the sense of “coordinated action by the European Union, the member states and local
                                                                      and regional authorities, based on partnership and aimed at drawing up and implementing
                                                                      EU policies.” Defending the rights of local and regional authorities is its calling, so
                                                                      there is nothing wrong with this. The question is whether an exclusive focus on vertical
                                                                      Correspondence Address: PO Box 5030, 2600 GA Delft, The Netherlands. Email: a.faludi@ipact.nl

                                                                      1464-9357 Print/1470-000X On-line/12/020197-15 q 2012 Taylor & Francis
                                                                      http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14649357.2012.677578
                                                                      198   A. Faludi

                                                                      intergovernmental relations justifies talking about multi-level governance. Commonly,
                                                                      governance is seen as broader than what government institutions do. It “refers to theories
                                                                      and issues of social coordination and the nature of all patterns of rule” and also to practices
                                                                      and dilemmas that place “less emphasis than did their predecessors on hierarchy and the
                                                                      state” (Bevir, 2011, p. 1). Already in the mid 1990s, Rhodes (1996, p. 660) drew attention to
                                                                      self-organising, inter-organisational networks. He described the characteristics of this,
                                                                      what he already described as governance, as interdependence between organisations,
                                                                      continuing interactions between network members, game-like interactions rooted in
                                                                      trust and regulated by rules of the game negotiated and agreed by network participants,
                                                                      a significant degree of autonomy from the state.
                                                                         Multi-level governance as a concept emerged during a veritable “governance turn” in
                                                                      EU studies in the 1980s. This represented a shift away from attempting to explain




Downloaded by [Kungliga Tekniska Hogskola] at 14:38 08 October 2014
                                                                      integration in terms of the respective roles of member states and the EU to a concern for
                                                                      explaining how the system actually works (Jordan, 2001; Kohler-Koch & Rittberger, 2006).
                                                                      Researchers found that practice did not fit the mould of the formal relations between levels
                                                                      that integration theories focused on, a finding replicated in research on European spatial
                                                                      planning. (For an overview, see Dühr et al., 2010, pp. 101 – 113). One line of researchers
                                                                      examined EU regional policy after its reform in the late 1980s and it was within this
                                                                      context that the concept of multi-level governance became popular and, as indicated, it
                                                                      penetrated the discourse also on European spatial planning as multi-level territorial
                                                                      governance.
                                                                         The paper identifies three problems with this. The least serious one is that the
                                                                      specification “territorial” is redundant. Multi-level governance as such is already
                                                                      inexorably territorial. The second problem is the ambiguity in multi-level governance. As
                                                                      indicated, commonly the focus is on relations between governments at various levels.
                                                                      Governments are in the business of governing and so one may ask why the talk is about
                                                                      multi-level governance. The third, least appreciated but arguably most fundamental
                                                                      problem concerns the underlying conceptions of space or territory. The paper identifies
                                                                      this problem, drawing on literature not generally referred to in this context. The focus will
                                                                      be on the “metageography” underlying multi-level governance described as “territori-
                                                                      alism”. Territorialism sees the world as a collection of fixed territories. It leads into what
                                                                      Agnew (1994) has once described as the “territorial trap”: a projection of the world in
                                                                      which power is imagined to be “pooled up” in equivalent territorial units. There is an
                                                                      alternative view of territory, not as something fixed, but as a malleable social construct,
                                                                      with implications for planning and beyond.
                                                                         These problems will be discussed in the ascending order of gravity outlined above.
                                                                      After talking about the derivative multi-level territorial governance in the first section,
                                                                      the second section discusses multi-level governance highlighting the ambiguity referred
                                                                      to. Section three problematises the conceptions of space or territory underlying. The
                                                                      conclusion summarises the argument and points at new planning challenges emerging.

                                                                      Planners Invoking Multi-Level Territorial Governance
                                                                      In the mid 2000s European spatial planners began to invoke the concept of multi-level
                                                                      territorial governance. By that time, the term “territory”, as in “territorial cohesion”, had
                                                                      entered their discourse (Faludi, 2006). The Dutch and the Luxembourg Presidency of the EU
                                                                      renewed the 1990s practice of informal ministerial meetings, starting with one at Rotterdam
                                                                      of ministers said to be responsible for territorial cohesion rather than, as the label had been
                                                                      previously, spatial planning. The assumption was that the “Treaty establishing a Constitution
                                                                                                                          Multi-Level (Territorial) Governance   199

                                                                      for Europe” defining territorial cohesion as an objective and as a shared competence would
                                                                      come into operation on 1 November 2006. (As far as territorial cohesion is concerned,
                                                                      its functional equivalent, the Treaty of Lisbon, came into operation on 1 December 2009.)
                                                                      Whilst the Constitution hung in the balance, the ministers and their advisers continued in
                                                                      their quest to come to terms with this concept, producing the “Territorial Agenda of the
                                                                      European Union” (Territorial Agenda, 2007; Faludi, 2009). One year later came the “First
                                                                      Action Programme”. This made the first mention in an official document of strengthening
                                                                      multi-level territorial governance in the EU as “a fundamental tool for a balanced spatial
                                                                      development of the European Union” (First Action Programme, 2007, p. 2) and this became
                                                                      one of the “Lines of Action” to which ministers committed themselves.
                                                                         Multi-level territorial governance has been invoked on other occasions, for instance by
                                                                      CEMAT. In 2008, the Committee of Senior Officials of this “European Conference of




Downloaded by [Kungliga Tekniska Hogskola] at 14:38 08 October 2014
                                                                      Ministers responsible for Spatial/Regional Planning” of the Council of Europe—the
                                                                      acronym CEMAT being based on its French designation—proposed “a common policy
                                                                      under which all spatial planning, development and management instruments would
                                                                      incorporate climate change into their ‘mitigation and adaptation’ dimension, and the
                                                                      appropriate processes of ‘multi-level’ territorial governance” (Council of Europe, 2008).
                                                                      The concept found its way also into the “Moscow Declaration” of CEMAT where it noted
                                                                      that, “in central and eastern Europe too, the decentralisation process, which started later,
                                                                      has progressed significantly, generating, as in western Europe, structures of multi-level
                                                                      territorial governance” (CEMAT, 2010, p. 3).
                                                                         The European Commission’s Green Paper on Territorial Cohesion (Commission of the
                                                                      European Communities, 2008) eschewed any mention of multi-level governance, let alone
                                                                      multi-level territorial governance, but several reactions to the paper did so. For instance,
                                                                      the European Parliament (2009) held that “real partnerships between all the parties
                                                                      involved in regional and local development at EU, national, regional and local level, is
                                                                      a precondition for the process of designing territorial cohesion and calls on the
                                                                      Commission and the member states to make all efforts to develop such a multi-level
                                                                      territorial governance.”
                                                                         The “Territorial Agenda of the European Union 2020” speaks of multi-level governance
                                                                      rather than multi-level territorial governance, but it is clear that the ministers interpreted
                                                                      multi-level governance in the same sense as CEMAT above. Thus, multi-level governance
                                                                      must “ensure balanced and coordinated contribution of local, regional, national and
                                                                      European actors . . . This needs vertical and horizontal coordination between decision-
                                                                      making bodies at different levels and sector-related policies to secure consistency and
                                                                      synergy” (Territorial Agenda, 2011). This echoes the “Territorial State and Perspectives”
                                                                      being the expert document on which the ministers based themselves, quoted at the beginning
                                                                      of this paper and which invokes multi-level territorial governance in so many words.
                                                                         The word “territorial” adds nothing to the meaning of multi-level governance which, as
                                                                      commonly understood, is already “territorial”. Even case studies in fields that do not seem
                                                                      to be about territorial issues show territory as being implicated. Piattoni (2010, p. 255)
                                                                      finds that “policies that best lend themselves to being governed by MLG are those with an
                                                                      arguable link to territory.” That multi-level governance is territorial may be taken as read.


                                                                      Multi-Level Governance
                                                                      This section highlights the second problem identified above; the ambiguity between
                                                                      multi-level governance as merely signalling the recognition of polities (in particular that of
                                                                      the EU) being multi-level on the one hand, and the shift from governing to governance on
                                                                      200   A. Faludi

                                                                      the other. Inter-organisational networks exist between government institutions. Their
                                                                      work thus takes on features of governance, with administrations lobbying, much like
                                                                      functional and civil society organisations (Piattoni, 2010, p. 243). However, governance
                                                                      refers not only to these networks, but to “all forms of collective action focused on the
                                                                      public realm . . . from those orchestrated by formal government agencies, to lobby
                                                                      groups, self-regulating groups and social campaigns and movements” (Healey, 2006,
                                                                      p. 302) Where multi-level governance is invoked mainly to underscore the position of
                                                                      some level of administration—where the focus is mainly on vertical relations within
                                                                      a multi-level polity—the qualification as governance is questionable.
                                                                        There are two parts to this section. The first discusses multi-level governance in its
                                                                      original meaning when the emphasis was on the fact that the EU represented a multi-level
                                                                      polity. The second discusses type I and type II multi-level governance as identified by




Downloaded by [Kungliga Tekniska Hogskola] at 14:38 08 October 2014
                                                                      Hooghe and Marks. Like the classic concept, type I puts more emphasis on multi-level
                                                                      polities. Type II is about forms of governance that are not necessarily multi-level. Piattoni’
                                                                      (2010, p. 257) attempts to marry the two, but in the end comes down on the side of
                                                                      favouring territorial jurisdictions where responsibility rests “for tying the many policy
                                                                      knots into coherent wholes.”


                                                                      A Multi-Level Polity
                                                                      Initially, whether arrangements in the EU are “intergovernmental”, meaning that member
                                                                      states merely delegate some limited powers to Brussels, or “supranational” so that the EU
                                                                      is more like a (quasi-)federation, has been the object of debate in relevant textbooks.
                                                                      Examples are Rosemond (2000), Nugent (2006) and from the perspective of European
                                                                      spatial planning, Dühr et al. (2010). The “governance turn” already referred to, shifted the
                                                                      emphasis away from what the EU is to how the EU works. An example is given by Hix and
                                                                      Hoyland (2011) who, rather than with grand theories of integration, deal with the
                                                                      application of political theory to the European political system. The EU polity is treated,
                                                                      not as something in need of explanation or justification, but as a given.
                                                                         So during the governance turn, policy-making became the focus of attention. This
                                                                      related “either to the debate about ‘regionalization’ of Europe and the new role of regions
                                                                      in EU governance, or to the investigation of new modes of governance, such as the
                                                                      implementation of the ‘partnership principle’ and the ensuing effects” (Kohler-Koch &
                                                                      Rittberger, 2009, p. 32). Researchers focusing on the Structural Funds in particular soon
                                                                      found that “variable combinations of governments on multiple layers of authority—
                                                                      European, national, and subnational—form policy networks for collaboration. The
                                                                      relations are characterized by mutual interdependence” (Hooghe, 1996, p. 18).
                                                                         The reason for this new mode of operation, as regards the Structural Funds, was the
                                                                      paradigmatic shift in regional policy from finance for regional investments, including
                                                                      infrastructure, to regions themselves identifying clusters of industries, implementing
                                                                      strategies of flexible specialisation and fostering endogenous potentials of locations,
                                                                      including cultural and environmental assets (Benz, 2000). Of course, there is a world of
                                                                      thought about economic development as such, although this is not the topic for discussion
                                                                      here. The EU absorbing this new paradigm involved regional and local, public and private
                                                                      actors under what was called the partnership principle, a more general feature of the “new
                                                                      modes of governance” (Conzelmann, 2008) and a keystone of the European model of
                                                                      society under Commission President, Jacques Delors (Faludi, 2007).
                                                                         So the concept of multi-level governance arose in connection with efforts to understand
                                                                      the operations of the Structural Funds. Conzelmann (2008) credits Marks (1992) with
                                                                                                                          Multi-Level (Territorial) Governance   201

                                                                      having invoked it for the first time. Gary Marks is but one of many distinguished
                                                                      “Euro-watchers” from across the Atlantic who contribute to thinking about European
                                                                      integration. Although originally from Belgium, his co-author on many occasions, Lisbeth
                                                                      Hooghe, like him, hails from the University of North Carolina, USA.
                                                                         According to Marks’s first seminal contribution, the reform of the Structural Funds
                                                                      raised questions about decision-making across the Community, member states and
                                                                      regional governments. He started with asking whether the EU was to be understood as
                                                                      a club of member states (the intergovernmental, or state-centred perspective), or whether
                                                                      it was something above the member states (the supranational perspective). However,
                                                                      a closer look at regional policy pointed in the altogether different direction of some form of
                                                                      “network governance” (see also Kohler-Koch & Rittberger, 2006, p. 34). Note, though, that
                                                                      Marks’s concern was not the position of non-state actors. The “network governance” to




Downloaded by [Kungliga Tekniska Hogskola] at 14:38 08 October 2014
                                                                      which he referred pointed to networks between governmental bodies at various levels
                                                                      interacting. Also, the growth of funding as such for what is now better known as cohesion
                                                                      policy could be explained from a state-centred perspective which seemingly supports an
                                                                      intergovernmental view of integration. Marks (1992, p. 192) concluded that neither this
                                                                      nor the supranational view were adequate; one needed instead to “adopt a more open-
                                                                      textured, multilevel perspective.” Indeed, paying particular attention to the roles of
                                                                      sub-national levels, multi-level governance as a concept transcended the distinction
                                                                      between the two views, a point discussed critically by Jordan (2001).
                                                                         The procedural reforms in EU regional policy pioneered as they had been during the
                                                                      previous Integrated Mediterranean Programmes, required direct dialogue between the
                                                                      European Commission and those in the field. This strengthened the Commission and
                                                                      depoliticised a key and growing policy area. Indeed, regional policy, “by creating direct
                                                                      links between the Funds and regional political institutions, challenges centralized decision
                                                                      making within member states” (Marks, 1992, p. 212).
                                                                         Marks noted that structural policy was in flux due to a new understanding of the
                                                                      Commission’s role, mobilising, as it did, subnational governments, with national
                                                                      governments responding by attempting to control the newly formed relations. As a
                                                                      consequence of these cross-currents, instead of a consistent pattern of policy-making, “one
                                                                      finds extremely wide and persistent variation. In short, the European Community seems
                                                                      to be part of a new political (dis)order that is multilayered, constitutionally open-ended,
                                                                      and programmatically diverse” (Marks, 1992, p. 221). Marks’s final comment related to the
                                                                      notion of the state, the Weberian concept (rooted in the control of legitimate means of
                                                                      coercion within territory under its control) and which reveals “less and less about the
                                                                      realities of political power and decision making in Western Europe” (Marks, 1992, p. 223).
                                                                         Thus, Marks’s concern was not what has frequently become the focus since: the position
                                                                      of the regions and local authorities. Rather, the concern was to understand the nature of
                                                                      a new phenomenon in terms of what Marks more often called a “multi-level polity” than
                                                                      “multi-level governance”. Indeed, Jordan (2001, p. 201) asked pointedly whether Marks’s
                                                                      multi-level governance was not really multi-level government since he “focused
                                                                      exclusively on subnational authorities rather than other subnational actors.”
                                                                         The term multi-level governance has stuck even so, spawning a wealth of literature
                                                                      which Kohler-Koch and Rittberger (2006), Gualini (2006) and recently also Piattoni (2010)
                                                                      review. A first edited volume under the heading of multi-level governance (Hooghe, 1996)
                                                                      came out very quickly. In the same year a review essay was published (Marks et al., 1996) in
                                                                      the Journal of Common Market Studies, reminding the modern reader of the original
                                                                      shorthand for European integration as the creation of a “Common Market” in its title. The
                                                                      review essay made it abundantly clear that understanding the political architecture of
                                                                      202   A. Faludi

                                                                      Europe rather than the articulation of the position of regions, was what multi-level
                                                                      governance was about. Far from denying that states were important, arguably even “the
                                                                      most important pieces in the European puzzle” (Marks et al., 1996, p. 346), the essay asserted
                                                                      that member states did not monopolise European-level policy-making. Firstly, decision-
                                                                      making competencies were shared by actors at different levels; secondly, their involvement
                                                                      in collective decision-making implied loss of control for individual state executives; thirdly,
                                                                      political arenas were interconnected rather than nested: “While national arenas remain
                                                                      important . . . the multi-level model rejects the view that subnational actors are nested
                                                                      exclusively within them. Instead, subnational actors operate in both national and
                                                                      supranational arenas, creating transnational associations in the process” leading to
                                                                      network governance.
                                                                         Like Marks’s sole-authored work, the three authors gave a detailed analysis of EU




Downloaded by [Kungliga Tekniska Hogskola] at 14:38 08 October 2014
                                                                      decision making. As again in the earlier paper by Marks, the talk was more in terms of the
                                                                      EU as a multi-level polity than of multi-level governance. The conclusions were thus that
                                                                      “states in the European Union are being melded gently into a multi-level polity by their
                                                                      leaders and the actions of numerous subnational and supranational actors” (p. 371).
                                                                      Governance as a concept was more implied than discussed.
                                                                         The paper made the point also that one “does not have to argue that states are on the
                                                                      verge of political extinction to believe that their control of those living in their territories
                                                                      has significantly weakened” (Marks et al., 1996, p. 372) Furthermore, privileging those
                                                                      interests with technical expertise matching the style of EU policy-making, multi-level
                                                                      governance opens up multiple points of access for various interests. “In this turbulent
                                                                      process . . . it is patently clear that states no longer serve as the exclusive nexus between
                                                                      domestic politics and international relations. Direct connections are forged among
                                                                      political actors in diverse political arenas” (p. 372).
                                                                         This goes beyond the understanding of multi-level governance by the Committee of the
                                                                      Regions. There the emphasis is on the positions of regional and local levels of government.
                                                                      In this sense it was correct for Marks et al. (1996, p. 372) to speak about multi-level
                                                                      governance, but their main concern remained a better understanding of the governing of
                                                                      the EU as a multi-level polity. In their further work, Hooghe and Marks do not always
                                                                      distinguish between governing and governance. Rather, their publications on the two types
                                                                      of multi-level governance (Hooghe & Marks, 2001, 2003, 2010; Marks & Hooghe, 2004) point
                                                                      out the emergence worldwide of new, decentralised ways of governing, the topic also of yet
                                                                      another publication of theirs focusing on the rise of regional authorities (Hooghe et al., 2010).


                                                                      Multi-Level Governance Type I and Type II
                                                                      The ambiguity between multi-level governance as signalling the existence of multi-level
                                                                      polities on the one hand and the shift from governing to governance on the other will
                                                                      become more evident when discussing the distinction between type I and type II multi-
                                                                      level governance.
                                                                        Focusing first of all on decentralised ways of governing, Hooghe and Marks (2010, p. 17)
                                                                      point out that formal authority “has been dispersed from central states both up to
                                                                      supranational institutions and down to regional and local governments.” They talk in so
                                                                      many words about “ways of governing”, and indeed the paper does not make great play
                                                                      of the involvement of non-governmental actors. The authors point out also that the
                                                                      membership boundaries of the general-purpose jurisdictions do not intersect. The
                                                                      consequence is that “every citizen is located in a Russian doll set of nested jurisdictions,
                                                                      where there is one and only one relevant jurisdiction at any particular territorial scale”
                                                                                                                             Multi-Level (Territorial) Governance     203

                                                                      (Hooghe & Marks, 2010, pp. 17– 18). The “Russian doll” figure of speech is often used,
                                                                      mostly to criticise the simplifications which it implies. Mahon and Keil (2009, p. 14) thus
                                                                      invoke it for situations “where each doll/scale is understood as largely capable of being
                                                                      considered on its own, even while located in its (fixed) position within a preordained
                                                                      hierarchy.” Amin (2004) and Hajer (2009) do likewise and with equally critical intent.
                                                                         Type II multi-level governance refers to specialised jurisdictions. Their number is
                                                                      potentially huge and the scales vary. The jurisdictions tend to be lean and flexible and
                                                                      task-specific, and their intersecting memberships criss-cross judicial boundaries. In terms
                                                                      frequently invoked by planners, type II multi-level governance refers to sectors such as
                                                                      transport, education or healthcare, and the relevant arrangements are, for example,
                                                                      a highway authority, a school authority or a hospital administration. As indicated, there is
                                                                      more emphasis on the relevant agencies than on the involvement of civic society, but it is




Downloaded by [Kungliga Tekniska Hogskola] at 14:38 08 October 2014
                                                                      clear that, since relations between functional agencies are less well-defined than the
                                                                      relations within the Russian doll, this form leans towards the diffusion of decision-
                                                                      making, which is characteristic of governance.
                                                                         There is a territorial dimension to these arrangements. Those responsible have
                                                                      jurisdiction (albeit partial) over a certain area: a river basin, a school or hospital district, the
                                                                      area of responsibility of a metropolitan transport authority, and so forth. Naturally, what
                                                                      these agencies do when and where impacts on the areas of responsibility of general-
                                                                      purpose administrations. Conzelmann has signalled in the quotation at the beginning of
                                                                      this paper that functional arrangements criss-cross jurisdictions. Water catchment areas
                                                                      referred to by Hooghe and Marks (2010, p. 18) are good examples, and so are commuter
                                                                      areas and nature areas. Not all such functional areas are covered by adequate
                                                                      arrangements. In any case, territorial authorities will always want to get a handle on
                                                                      whatever arrangements exist. Whether they are successful or not is an altogether different
                                                                      matter, but the picture is certainly complex.
                                                                         Hooghe and Marks (2010) are aware of the complexity of type I and II existing cheek by
                                                                      jowl. They invoke Rosenau (1999, p. 292) talking about fragmegration: public and private
                                                                      actors collaborating and competing in shifting coalitions. Echoing Anderson (1996) on
                                                                      “New Medievalism,” Hooghe and Marks (2010) point out that, in its totality, type II multi-
                                                                      level governance indeed resembles pre-modern government. Zielonka (2006, p. 190) even
                                                                      sees the EU as such as a neo-medieval empire with fuzzy boundaries characteristic of such
                                                                      configurations, and recently, new medievalism has been invoked by Khanna (2011) in
                                                                      interpreting global governance. All this stands for overlapping authority structures, a far
                                                                      cry from the “Russian doll.”
                                                                         Like the Committee of the Region’s 2009 White Paper quoted in the introduction,
                                                                      European multi-level governance is often conceived in terms of type I. Planners tend to see
                                                                      it this way. Generally speaking, they are responsible for bounded jurisdictions. However,
                                                                      there are also variable territorial arrangements and distinct governance systems. Cross-
                                                                      border and transnational co-operation gives von Wedel (2010) cause to talk about
                                                                      a “re-medievalisation” of Europe. Next to these forms common in Europe, he also invokes
                                                                      the new macro-regional strategies as further evidence of this. (On the macro-regional
                                                                      strategies, see also Metzger & Schmitt, 2012; Stead, 2011.) The “Baltic Sea Area,” the
                                                                      “Danube Space,” perhaps in due course also the “Alpine Space” and the “Adriatic Space”
                                                                      (INTERACT, 2012) are all type-II examples with only a vague relation to geographic
                                                                      entities and with no territorial jurisdictions exercising overall authority over them.
                                                                         Type I multi-level governance is orientated to intrinsic communities where type II is
                                                                      ubiquitous in organising spill-overs in the absence of authoritative coordination. Hooghe
                                                                      and Marks (2010, p. 29) emphasise, and Piattoni (2010, p. 247) agrees, that “both must be
                                                                      204   A. Faludi

                                                                      maintained for the sake of the unique interests and values that they represent.” Piattoni
                                                                      affirms and expands on this saying that “territories retain their relevance as policy
                                                                      decisions tend to have a localized impact and numerous ‘factors’ cannot be easily
                                                                      relocated (infrastructure, environment, knowledge, people).” (Piattoni, 2010, p. 250).
                                                                         The argument here has been about the very concept of multi-level governance
                                                                      oscillating between a focus on multi-level polities—which is what type I does—and
                                                                      drawing attention to the multifarious relations cross-cutting hierarchical arrangements—
                                                                      which is what type II does so well. At first sight, our every-day conceptions of space and in
                                                                      particular of territory seem to fit in neatly with type I, based on jurisdictions with fixed
                                                                      boundaries, but a closer look at the literature shows things to be more complex.

                                                                      Conceptions of Space and Territory




Downloaded by [Kungliga Tekniska Hogskola] at 14:38 08 October 2014
                                                                      Murphy (2008, p. 8) contends that the “institutional-cum-political-economic emphasis” in
                                                                      the multi-level governance literature needs to be supplemented “with a concern for the
                                                                      ways in which territorial understanding and arrangements are shaping how things are
                                                                      organized on the ground and how people conceptualize Europe as a geographical
                                                                      construct.” He invokes the term “metageography” and points out also that there is a
                                                                      growing body of opinion holding that the EU “challenges the territorial logic of the modern
                                                                      state system.” More specifically, it “can no longer be understood in terms of the sovereignty
                                                                      norms of the modern state system because governmental competencies are no longer
                                                                      concentrated in discrete political spaces organized at a single scale or level.” (Murphy, 2008,
                                                                      p. 7) Surely, this means that the “intrinsic communities” which Hooghe and Marks refer to,
                                                                      as well as the “subnational territorial communities” invoked by Piattoni, are problematic
                                                                      categories. One must contemplate another metageography that avoids falling into what
                                                                      Agnew (1994) identifies as the “territorial trap.” Conventional thinking in international
                                                                      relations theory—being the object of Agnew’s concern—assumes that states are fixed units
                                                                      of sovereign space; that there is a clear dividing line between domestic and foreign policy;
                                                                      and that states are “containers” of societies. Agnew shows that these conventional thoughts
                                                                      are no longer helpful. This is also true for the issues discussed in this paper.
                                                                         This section draws on literature criticising the assumption of territory as a fixed
                                                                      container. The purpose is not to review all of its branches, where notions of scale and place
                                                                      and space and territory are being discussed from different angles (Jessop et al., 2008; Keil &
                                                                      Mahon, eds. 2009). The sole purpose here is to cast light on multi-level governance by
                                                                      offering a critique of the underlying metageography.

                                                                      Metageography
                                                                      Without invoking the actual term “metageography”, Scholte in his work on globalisation
                                                                      challenges the dominant metageography of the EU. He characterises it as “territorialism.”
                                                                      Under territorialism “macro social space is wholly organized in terms of units such as
                                                                      districts, towns, provinces, countries and regions. In times of statist territorialism more in
                                                                      particular, countries have held pride of place above the other kinds of territorial realms”
                                                                      (Scholte, 2000, p. 47). Some connections are partly detached from this territorial logic.
                                                                      In global transactions, “place” is not territorially fixed, territorial distance is covered in
                                                                      effectively no time, and territorial boundaries present no particular impediment. In terms
                                                                      of Castells (1996), to whom Scholte refers, the “space of flows” overgrows the “space of
                                                                      places”. Social space cannot, therefore, be understood in terms of territorial geography
                                                                      alone—not in terms of districts, towns, provinces and so forth, with borders marking the
                                                                      limits of the jurisdiction of the authorities responsible for them.
                                                                                                                            Multi-Level (Territorial) Governance    205

                                                                         In Scholte’s work one can discern echoes of Hooghe and Marks’s type I and type II
                                                                      multi-level governance. What is missing in the literature on this topic is any awareness of
                                                                      different notions of underlying territory. Metageography refers to spatial structures of
                                                                      thought underlying perceptions of the world—giving another dimension to a simple
                                                                      map of sovereign states. Murphy (2008) gives examples of the effect of invoking implicit
                                                                      metageography; continents being thought of as collections of states, and religious realms
                                                                      mapped by assigning states to one or the other of them. Such conceptions are important,
                                                                      Murphy says, because they shape our understanding and our actions. Particularly as
                                                                      regards the EU, “a metageography clearly persists that casts states as the region’s most
                                                                      important internal spaces and that treats political-territorial developments at other levels
                                                                      largely in terms of the ideological norms that underpin the modern state system.”
                                                                      (Murphy, 2008, p. 9) This can lead into Agnew’s “territorial trap”. It is tempting to discuss




Downloaded by [Kungliga Tekniska Hogskola] at 14:38 08 October 2014
                                                                      EU policy stalemates in terms of the territorial trap, but this is not the topic of this paper.


                                                                      Territoriality
                                                                      The other concept Murphy refers to is territoriality. According to the definition which he
                                                                      quotes by Sack (1986, p. 1) this is “a spatial strategy to affect, influence, or control resources
                                                                      and people, by controlling area.” Territoriality is changing—particularly the territoriality
                                                                      of the state. The reason is that controls are being dispersed over a field featuring
                                                                      competing but interlocking institutions. This leads one to appreciate the European
                                                                      map “not as a set of spaces to be discussed and analysed, but as the outcome of efforts to
                                                                      achieve particular ends with concrete implications for how things are organized and how
                                                                      people think about the world around them” (Murphy, 2008, p. 91). Murphy continues by
                                                                      saying that the “territoriality of the European state system helped to produce a
                                                                      geographical imagination that privileges the ‘nation-states’ over river basins, vegetation
                                                                      zones, population concentrations, or other possible regionalizations.” The latter are of
                                                                      course examples of functional territories relevant in multi-level governance type II.
                                                                         The existence of “Westphalian blinders” (Mahon & Keil, 2009, p. 10) has been castigated by
                                                                      others, for instance by Marks in his first paper on multi-level governance. Piattoni (2010,
                                                                      p. 247) likewise rejects the European obsession—her words—with the traditional concept of
                                                                      the state, and wants the federal idea, which she seeks to resuscitate, to be emancipated from
                                                                      categories of sovereignty and constitutional supremacy. Neither Marks nor Piattoni couch
                                                                      their arguments in terms of either metageography or territorialism, but these concepts are
                                                                      clearly relevant. Thus, in particular under type I multi-level governance, territory is the area
                                                                      over which government formations exercise jurisdiction, and space overall is filled to the
                                                                      brim with such units. It is their responsibility for such circumscribed jurisdictions where
                                                                      political and bureaucratic elites rest their case for exercising power. Space overall is thus
                                                                      neatly divided, allocated, investigated and taxed. Land-use planning, of course, relates to this
                                                                      administered space, with every location having rights and obligations attached to it that can
                                                                      be read off an official map and attendant regulations. Alongside others, therefore, planners—
                                                                      in particular those in land-use control—tend to work with a territorialist metageography.
                                                                         Whether as individuals or as corporate bodies, actors are thus seen as embedded in
                                                                      Hooghe and Marks’s “Russian doll” with addresses that not only locate them in space, but
                                                                      also in relation to various levels of government and administration. Actors also forge
                                                                      networks cross-cutting administrative boundaries and these cannot be contained, which
                                                                      can be problematic. One very large “box” —a situation veering towards the nightmare of
                                                                      a European superstate which opponents of integration paint on the wall—is no answer.
                                                                      There are always external links. In a series of publications, Allmendinger and Haughton
                                                                      206   A. Faludi

                                                                      have identified and investigated the “soft” spaces created in this way (Allmendinger &
                                                                      Haughton, 2009, 2010; Haughton et al., 2010). Faludi (2010) sees “soft planning for soft
                                                                      spaces” as the future for European planning.


                                                                      Relational Space
                                                                      In this context it is relevant to look at literature that addresses planning transcending
                                                                      jurisdictional boundaries. Couching their analysis in terms of “scale” rather than space or
                                                                      territory, Janssen-Jansen and Hutton (2011, p. 307) in a special issue on metropolitan
                                                                      planning around Milan, Stuttgart, Portland, Vancouver and Amsterdam claim that it is
                                                                      hard to find the right scale for strategic planning. Like others do with territory, they claim
                                                                      that scale is a dynamic concept, varying by theme and time. The urban region does not,




Downloaded by [Kungliga Tekniska Hogskola] at 14:38 08 October 2014
                                                                      therefore, exist. Rather, regions are always in the making, “defined on the basis of a
                                                                      particular theme or subject around which the actors have formed a coalition.”
                                                                         Dangschat (2006) argues similarly that our understanding of space—in Murphy’s terms
                                                                      “our metageography”—needs to move from viewing it as contiguous jurisdictions to
                                                                      conceiving of it as overlapping networks. The former view assumes that responsibility
                                                                      ends at the border. Dangschat replaces this “container view” of space with one which
                                                                      takes how people organise themselves in space as its point of departure. This leads him to
                                                                      identify a discrepancy between the space of planners and administrators, and the
                                                                      everyday spatial practices of citizens.
                                                                         Davoudi and Strange (2009) see places as economically, socially and culturally produced.
                                                                      Davoudi (2011) relates this to the emergence of an interpretative, as against a positivist,
                                                                      tradition in spatial planning. The relational concept views space as being dependent on the
                                                                      processes and substances that make it up. The introduction to their edited volume starts
                                                                      with quoting Thrift (2003, p. 95) where he says “space . . . . is the outcome of a series of . . .
                                                                      settlements that divide and connect things up into different kinds of collectives.” In the
                                                                      relational view, “the process of place formation becomes a process of carving out
                                                                      “permanences” from the flow of processes creating spaces.” In a passage reminiscent of
                                                                      Hooghe and Marks, Davoudi and Strange (2009, p. 38) say that space “can be seen as both a
                                                                      nested hierarchy with fixed boundaries determined by movements, networks, nodes and
                                                                      hierarchies as well as an interconnected web with contingent boundaries, constantly
                                                                      territorialized, and a site of political contestation” (Davoudi & Strange, 2009, p. 39). In
                                                                      terms of type I and type II multi-level governance one might say that both exist, and will
                                                                      continue to exist alongside each other, a conclusion which Hooghe and Marks share.
                                                                         Davoudi and Strange thus conceptualise space as depending on the processes and
                                                                      substances making it up. In this “relational” view, “place formation” becomes a process of
                                                                      carving out “permanences” from the flow of processes creating spaces. Invoking
                                                                      a “relational” view, they build on the radical geographer Harvey. Harvey made his
                                                                      distinction between absolute and relative space more than 40 years ago when he criticised
                                                                      the absolute view of space as a neutral container, a filing system or abstract frame of
                                                                      reference—a view which advances in physics and in geometry had long discredited.
                                                                      Harvey contrasted this with a view of space as a positional, relational quality of the world of
                                                                      material objects. His example was location theory, conceptualising cities as influencing the
                                                                      properties of the spaces around them. He concluded that “it is no longer feasible to take a
                                                                      container view of space. Activities and objects themselves define the spatial fields of
                                                                      influence . . . . The notion of an absolute space . . . no longer holds” (Harvey, 1969, p. 209).
                                                                         Another author absorbing the relational view is Healey. With Graham she criticises
                                                                      what they call the bedrock-concept of the object-centred Euclidean conception of space
                                                                                                                          Multi-Level (Territorial) Governance   207

                                                                      (Graham & Healey, 1999). In a well-received book, Splintering Urbanism, the title of which
                                                                      encapsulates its message, Graham and Marvin (2001, p. 33) take this further, showing that
                                                                      “infrastructure networks are being ‘unbundled’ in ways that help sustain the fragmentation
                                                                      of the social and material fabric of cities.” This drives the authors to ask “what becomes of
                                                                      cities as a whole . . . ?” (Graham & Marvin, 2001, p. 382; emphasis in the original). They see
                                                                      a danger of the collapse of the “integrated ideal”, but remark on countervailing powers:
                                                                      social movements, but also “local and national state and governance regimes” (p. 397). They
                                                                      cannot entirely avoid putting their trust ultimately in such regimes, but such regimes are
                                                                      inexorably linked to the single representation of space which they critique.
                                                                         A planning author who has ensured that frontline social-science thinking penetrates
                                                                      planning discourse (including thinking on space) is Healey, who co-authored the paper
                                                                      with Graham and who has recently reaffirmed her concern with place governance “with




Downloaded by [Kungliga Tekniska Hogskola] at 14:38 08 October 2014
                                                                      a planning orientation.” She explores what “place” this might mean. Without referring in
                                                                      so many words to any “territorial trap”, she points out that “those with a ‘stake’ in what
                                                                      happens in a place are not only local residents, or citizens, of a specific administrative-
                                                                      political jurisdiction. ‘Stakeholders’ may come from other places” (Healey, 2010, p. 32).
                                                                      It follows that jurisdictions “may not be coterminous with the key relations that need to be
                                                                      mobilised to address particular place-management and development problems and
                                                                      potentialities” (p. 69). In the concluding chapter, Healey (2010) reiterates this point saying
                                                                      that in improving the conditions of life for people in terms of their relations “it is
                                                                      important to move away from conceiving such relations as a kind of nested hierarchy of
                                                                      systems . . . Instead, systems are better imagined as overlapping, loosely bounded and
                                                                      ‘loosely coupled’ sets of relations” (p. 226).
                                                                         So here, too, the Russian doll view of space is being challenged. The conventional
                                                                      interpretation of multi-level governance assumes a metageography precisely in terms of
                                                                      a “kind of nested hierarchy of systems”, a Russian doll, rather than a loosely bound set of
                                                                      relations. Accordingly, rights to take decisions are “limited by some form of scope rules,
                                                                      including a legal system” (Zimmermann et al., 2011, p. 27). The principle of subsidiarity
                                                                      applying in the EU context assumes such a Russian doll (Faludi, 2012). By way of contrast,
                                                                      where relations are loosely bound, as in governance networks, there “the members of the
                                                                      network take the decision, based on some sort of collective agreement” (Zimmermann
                                                                      et al., 2011, pp. 27– 28). In the terms of Murphy, the metageography is radically different.


                                                                      Conclusions
                                                                      The purpose of this paper has been to show that multi-level (territorial) governance as
                                                                      a concept is problematic. The critique has been threefold:
                                                                      1. The minor criticism has been that, invoked by spatial planners, the adjective
                                                                         “territorial” as in multi-level territorial governance, is redundant.
                                                                      2. Multi-level governance is ambiguous. It often refers to vertical relations between
                                                                         bodies of government within a multi-level polity and not to the more comprehensive
                                                                         process called governance.
                                                                      3. Multi-level governance fails to problematise the territorialist underlying
                                                                         metageography.
                                                                         The multi-level governance literature is neglecting an important aspect of its very object:
                                                                      the opportunity for appreciating “that the EU cannot be grasped solely in terms of the
                                                                      territorial vocabulary associated with the modern state system” (Murphy, 2008, p. 16).
                                                                      Invoking the concept of multi-level governance should thus lead to an appreciation of
                                                                      208    A. Faludi

                                                                      “the types of territorial arrangements that are offering meaningful alternatives to the
                                                                      spatial imperatives of the state system” (Murphy, 2008, p. 16). With special reference to
                                                                      programmes such as INTERREG, Murphy surmises more in particular that “the EU offers
                                                                      the possibility of overcoming some of the territorial rigidities of the modern state system.”
                                                                      He even invokes the prospect of “a new phase in the evolution of the European political-
                                                                      territorial order” (Murphy, 2008, p. 16). Being openly normative in her advocacy of a form
                                                                      of federalism, Piattoni (2010) seems to be thinking along similar lines. Considering such
                                                                      issues is a challenge, but if there is one thing the current crisis shows, then it is that
                                                                      arrangements in the EU no longer reflect the real interdependence in Europe.
                                                                         Planners may want to focus on more practical concerns. The lesson for them is to
                                                                      break out of the “territorial trap” in which they find themselves and investigate and
                                                                      create new soft spaces. Their vanguard is already exploring alternative spatial or




Downloaded by [Kungliga Tekniska Hogskola] at 14:38 08 October 2014
                                                                      territorial arrangements, observing the organising principle which Davoudi and
                                                                      Strange (2009, p. 38) have outlined: multiple overlapping networks with continuous
                                                                      flows of people, resources and knowledge being “represented and visualised through
                                                                      the use of ‘scenarios’ and ‘fuzzy maps’ showing untidy and complicated flows.”
                                                                         Invoking such soft spatial categories in practice is no sinecure. Jurisdictions are
                                                                      entrenched. Harrison (2012) offers a case study of north-west England, where the regional
                                                                      strategy embraced a network approach but in the end was unable to circumvent the
                                                                      mosaic of jurisdictions. Metzger and Schmitt (2012, p. 275) have shown that even in the
                                                                      case of the Baltic Sea Region, a prime example of a soft space, there is a tendency for
                                                                      solidification “through the singularization of previously multiple concomitant articula-
                                                                      tions of the region, and a stabilization of institutionalized arrangements.” The aim cannot
                                                                      be to simply replace existing institutions and practices but to achieve a synthesis between
                                                                      them and any new ones, always based on the awareness that, deeply entrenched though it
                                                                      might be, territorialism is not everything. Other metageographies need to be factored in.
                                                                      Imagining them is a new and challenging task in which planners might want to excel.


                                                                      Note
                                                                      1. A previous version was presented at a workshop convened by Marcin Dabrowski, John Bachtler and
                                                                         François Bafoil in cooperation with the Regional Studies Association at the Institute for European Integration
                                                                         Research, Austrian Academy for Sciences, in December 2011. The author wishes to thank Dominic Stead of
                                                                         Delft University of Technology, OTB Research Institute for the Built Environment and three anonymous
                                                                         reviewers for their helpful comments.

                                                                      References
                                                                      Agnew, J. (1994) The territorial trap: The geographical assumptions of international relations theory, Review of
                                                                        International Political Economy, 1(1), pp. 53–80.
                                                                      Allmendinger, P. & Haughton, G. (2009) Soft spaces, fuzzy boundaries, and metagovernance: The new spatial
                                                                        planning in the Thames Gateway, Environment and Planning A, 41(3), pp. 617–633.
                                                                      Allmendinger, P. & Haughton, G. (2010) Spatial planning, devolution, and new planning spaces, Environment and
                                                                        Planning C: Government and Policy, 28, pp. 803–818.
                                                                      Amin, A. (2004) Regions unbound: Towards a new politics of place, Geografiska Annaler Ser B, 86B(1), pp. 33 –44.
                                                                      Anderson, J. (1996) The shifting stage of politics: New medieval and postmodern territorialities?, Environment and
                                                                        Planning D: Society and Space, 14(2), pp. 133–153.
                                                                      Benz, A. (2000) Two types of multi-level governance: Intergovernmental relations in German and EU regional
                                                                        policy, Regional and Federal Studies, 10(3), pp. 21–44.
                                                                      Bevir, M. (2011) Governance as theory, practice, and dilemma, in: M. Bevir (Ed.) The Sage Handbook of Governance,
                                                                        pp. 1–16 (London, Sage).
                                                                                                                                      Multi-Level (Territorial) Governance           209

                                                                      Castells, M. (1996, 2000) The Rise of the Network Society: The Information Age—Economy, Society and Culture, Vol. I
                                                                        2nd edn (Cambridge, MA/Oxford, Blackwell).
                                                                      CEMAT (2010) Moscow Declaration, Available at http://www.coe.int/t/dg4/cultureheritage/heritage/cemat/
                                                                        confminist1-15/15eDeclaration_en.pdf (accessed 9 March 2012).
                                                                      Commission of the European Communities (2008) Communication from the Commission to the Council, the
                                                                        European Parliament, the Committee of the Regions and the European Economic and Social Committee: Green
                                                                        Paper on Territorial Cohesion: Turning territorial diversity into strength, Available at http://eur-lex.europa.eu/
                                                                        LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri¼COM:2008:0616:FIN:EN:PDF (accessed 9 March 2012).
                                                                      Committee of the Regions (2009) White Paper on Multilevel Governance (Own Initiative Report), Available
                                                                        at http://www.cor.europa.eu/pages/EventTemplate.aspx?view¼folder&id¼53788fb1-937b-44ce-bd39-
                                                                        b20f3313bc83&sm¼53788fb1-937b-44ce-bd39-b20f3313bc83 (accessed 9 March 2012).
                                                                      Conzelmann, T. (2008) Efficient and legitimate? Reflections on multi-level governance, in: T. Conzelmann &
                                                                        R. Smith (Eds) Multi-level Governance in the European Union: Taking Stock and Looking Ahead, pp. 11–30 (Baden-
                                                                        Baden, Nomos).




Downloaded by [Kungliga Tekniska Hogskola] at 14:38 08 October 2014
                                                                      Council of Europe, (2008) Global Warming and Ecological Disasters: Recommendation 1823 (2008), Available at
                                                                        http://www.assembly.coe.int/Main.asp?link¼/Documents/WorkingDocs/Doc08/EDOC11777.htm (accessed
                                                                        9 March 2012).
                                                                      Dangschat, J.S. (2006) Raumplanung unter Unsicherheit—Beherrschbarer Widerspruch? [Spatial planning under
                                                                        uncertainty – A manageable contradiction?] in: K. Selle (Ed.) Zur räumlichen Entwicklung beitragen: Konzepte,
                                                                        Theorien, Impulse, Planung neu denken [Contributing to spatial development: Concepts, theories, impulses,
                                                                        Reconsidering planning], Band 1, pp. 378 –388 (Dortmund, Rohn).
                                                                      Davoudi, S. (2011) The legacy of positivism and the emergence of interpretive tradition in spatial planning,
                                                                        Regional Studies, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00343404.2011.618120.
                                                                      Davoudi, S. & Strange, I. (2009) Conceptions of Space and Place in Strategic Spatial Planning (London, Routledge).
                                                                      Dühr, S., Colomb, C. & Nadin, V. (2010) European Spatial Planning and Territorial Cooperation (London/New York,
                                                                        Routledge).
                                                                      European Parliament (2009) European Parliament resolution of 24 March 2009 on the Green Paper on Territorial
                                                                        Cohesion and the state of the debate on the future reform of cohesion policy (2008/2174(INI)), Available at
                                                                        http://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?type¼TA&reference¼P6-TA-2009-0163&language¼EN
                                                                        (last accessed 9 March 2012).
                                                                      Faludi, A. (2006) From European spatial development to territorial cohesion policy, Regional Studies, 40(6),
                                                                        pp. 667–678.
                                                                      Faludi, A. (2007) Territorial Cohesion and the European Model of Society (Cambridge, MA, Lincoln Institute of Land
                                                                        Policy).
                                                                      Faludi, A. (2009) A turning point in the development of European spatial planning? The Territorial Agenda of the
                                                                        European Union and the First Action Programme, Progress in Planning, 71, pp. 1–42.
                                                                      Faludi, A. (2010) Cohesion, Coherence, Cooperation: European Spatial Planning Coming of Age? RTPI Library Series
                                                                        (London, Routledge).
                                                                      Faludi, A. (2012) Territorial cohesion and subsidiarity under the European Union treaties: A critique of the
                                                                        “territorialism” underlying, Regional Studies, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00343404.2012.657170.
                                                                      First Action Programme (2007) First Action Programme for the Implementation of the Territorial Agenda of the
                                                                        European Union (agreed 23 November 2007, at Ponta Delgada, Azores), Available at http://www.dgotdu.pt/
                                                                        rimotr/UE-doc/AP1_23NovembroVfinal.pdf (accessed 9 March 2012).
                                                                      Graham, S. & Healey, P. (1999) Relational concepts of space and place: Issues for planning theory and practice,
                                                                        European Planning Studies, 7(5), pp. 623 –646.
                                                                      Graham, S. & Marvin, S. (2001) Splintering Urbanism: Networked Infrastructures, Technological Mobilities and Urban
                                                                        Conditions (London/New York, Routledge).
                                                                      Gualini, E. (2006) The rescaling of governance in Europe: New spatial and institutional rationales, European
                                                                        Planning Studies, 14(7), pp. 881–904.
                                                                      Hajer, M.A. (2009) Authoritative Governance: Policy-Making in the Age of Mediatization (Oxford, Oxford University
                                                                        Press).
                                                                      Harrison, J. (2012) Configuring the new “regional world”: On being caught between territory and networks,
                                                                        Regional Studies, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00343404.2011.644239.
                                                                      Harvey, D. (1969) Explanation in Geography (London, Edward Arnold).
                                                                      Haughton, G., Allmendinger, P., Counsell, D. & Vigar, G. (2010) The New Spatial Planning: Territorial Management
                                                                        with Soft Spaces and Fuzzy Boundaries (London, Routledge).
                                                                      Healey, P. (2006) Transforming governance: Challenges of institutional adaptation and a new politics of space,
                                                                        European Planning Studies, 14(3), pp. 299 –320.
                                                                      210    A. Faludi

                                                                      Healey, P. (2010) Making Better Places—The Planning Project in the Twenty-First Century.
                                                                      Hix, S. & Hoyland, B. (2011) The Political System of the European Union, The European Union Series, 3rd edn
                                                                        (Basingstoke, Palgrave Macmillan).
                                                                      Hooghe, L. (1996) Introduction: Reconciling EU-wide policy and national diversity, in: L. Hooghe (Ed.) Cohesion
                                                                        Policy and European Integration: Building Multi-Level Governance, pp. 1 –24 (Oxford, Oxford University Press).
                                                                      Hooghe, L. & Marks, G. (2001) Multilevel Governance and European Integration (Lanham, MD/Oxford, Rowman &
                                                                        Littlefield).
                                                                      Hooghe, L. & Marks, G. (2003) Unravelling the central state, but how? Types of multilevel governance, American
                                                                        Political Science Review, 97(2), pp. 233 –243.
                                                                      Hooghe, L. & Marks, G. (2010) Types of multi-level governance, in: H. Enderlein, S. Wälti & M. Zürn (Eds) Types of
                                                                        Multilevel Governance, pp. 17–31 (Cheltenham, Elgar).
                                                                      Hooghe, L., Marks, G. & Schakel, A.H. (2010) The Rise of Regional Authority: A Comparative Study of 42 Democracies
                                                                        (London, Routledge).
                                                                      INTERACT (2012) European Macro-Regional Strategies: What the Future Holds (Sharing Experience), Winter




Downloaded by [Kungliga Tekniska Hogskola] at 14:38 08 October 2014
                                                                        2011/2012, Bratislava, INTERACT Programme Secretariat, Available at http://www.interact-eu.net/
                                                                        downloads/4788/Newsletter%2520%257C%2520January%25202012%2520%257C%2520Full%2520Edition.pdf
                                                                        (accessed 9 March 2012).
                                                                      Janssen-Jansen, L.B. & Hutton, T.A. (2011) Reconfiguring the governance structures of the twenty-first century
                                                                        city-region: Observation and conclusions, International Planning Studies, 16(3), pp. 305 –312.
                                                                      Jessop, B., Brenner, N. & Jones, M. (2008) Theorising sociospatial relations, Environment and Planning D: Society and
                                                                        Space, 26(3), pp. 389–401.
                                                                      Jordan, A. (2001) The European Union: An evolving system of multi-level governance . . . or government?,
                                                                        Policy & Politics, 29(2), pp. 193 –208.
                                                                      Keil, R. & Mahon, R. (2009) Leviathan Undone? Towards a Political Economy of Scale (Vancouver/Toronto, UBC
                                                                        Press).
                                                                      Khanna, P. (2011) How To Run the World: Charting a Course to the Next Renaissance (New York, Random House).
                                                                      Kohler-Koch, B. & Rittberger, B. (2006) Review article: The governance turn in EU studies, Journal of Common
                                                                        Market Studies, 44, pp. 27–49.
                                                                      Mahon, R. & Keil, R. (2009) Introduction, in: R. Keil & R. Mahon (Eds) Leviathan Undone? Towards a Political
                                                                        Economy of Scale, pp. 3–23 (Vancouver/Toronto, UBC Press).
                                                                      Marks, G. (1992) Structural policy in the European Community, in: A.M. Sbragia (Ed.) Euro-Politics: Institutions
                                                                        and Policymaking in the “New” European Community, pp. 191–224 (Washington, DC, Brookings Institute).
                                                                      Marks, G. & Hooghe, L. (2004) Contrasting visions of multi-level governance, in: I. Bache & M. Flinders (Eds)
                                                                        Multi-level Governance, pp. 15–30 (Oxford, Oxford University Press).
                                                                      Marks, G., Hooghe, L. & Blank, K. (1996) European integration from the 1980s: State-centric v. multi-level
                                                                        governance, Journal of Common Market Studies, 34(3), pp. 341–378.
                                                                      Metzger, J. & Schmitt, P. (2012) When soft spaces harden: The EU strategy for the Baltic Sea Region, Environment
                                                                        and Planning A, 44, pp. 263–280.
                                                                      Murphy, A.B. (2008) Rethinking multi-level governance in a changing European Union: Why metageography and
                                                                        territoriality matter, GeoJournal, 72(1–2), pp. 7–18.
                                                                      Nugent, N. (2006) The Government and Politics of the European Union, 5th edn (Basingstoke, Macmillan).
                                                                      Piattoni, S. (2010) The Theory of Multi-Level Governance: Conceptual, Empirical, and Normative Challenges (Oxford,
                                                                        Oxford University).
                                                                      Rhodes, R. (1996) The new governance: Governing without government, Political Studies, 44, pp. 652–667.
                                                                      Rosemond, B. (2000) Theories of European Integration (Basingstoke/London, Macmillan).
                                                                      Rosenau, J.N. (1999) Toward an ontology for global governance, in: M. Hewson & T. Sinclair (Eds) Approaches to
                                                                        Global Governance Theory, pp. 287 –301 (Albany, State University of New York Press).
                                                                      Sack, R.D. (1986) Human Territoriality: Its Theory and History (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press).
                                                                      Scholte, J.A. (2000) Globalization: A Critical Introduction (London, Macmillan).
                                                                      Stead, D. (2011) European Macro-Regional Strategies: Indications of spatial rescaling?, Planning Theory & Practice,
                                                                        12(1), pp. 163–167.
                                                                      Territorial Agenda (2007) Territorial Agenda of the European Union: Towards a More Competitive and
                                                                        Sustainable Europe of Diverse Regions—Agreed at the Occasion of the Informal Ministerial Meeting on Urban
                                                                        Development and Territorial Cohesion on 24/25 May 2007, Available at http://www.bmvbs.de/cae/servlet/
                                                                        contentblob/44188/publicationFile/11033/territorial-agenda-of-the-european-union-agreed-on-25-may-
                                                                        2007-accessible.pdf (accessed 9 March 2012).
                                                                      Territorial Agenda (2011) Territorial Agenda of the European Union 2020: Towards an Inclusive, Smart and
                                                                        Sustainable Europe of Diverse Regions; agreed at the Informal Ministerial Meeting of Ministers responsible for
                                                                                                                                     Multi-Level (Territorial) Governance          211

                                                                        Spatial Planning and Territorial Development on 19th May 2011, Gödöllő, Hungary, Available at http://www.
                                                                        eu2011.hu/files/bveu/documents/TA2020.pdf (accessed 9 March 2012).
                                                                      Territorial State and Perspectives (2011) The Territorial State and Perspectives of the European Union, 2011
                                                                        update, Background document for the Territorial Agenda of the European Union 2020, Available at
                                                                        http://www.eu-territorial-agenda.eu/Reference%20Documents/updated%20Territorial%20State%20and%20
                                                                        Perspective%20of%20the%20EU_May_2011_FINAL.pdf
                                                                      Thrift, N. (2003) Space: The fundamental stuff of geography, in: S.L. Halloway, S. Rice & G. Valentine (Eds) Key
                                                                        Concepts in Geography, pp. 95–108 (London, Sage).
                                                                      von Wedel, J. (2010) Remediävalisierung II: Zur Programmatik der Europäischen Regionalpolitik [Re-medie-
                                                                        valisation II: Concerning the programming of European regional policy], Raumforschung und Raumordnung, 68,
                                                                        pp. 389–396.
                                                                      Zielonka, J. (2006) Europe as Empire: The Nature of the Enlarged European Union (Oxford, Oxford University Press).
                                                                      Zimmerman, K., Denters, B. & Klok, P.-J. (2011) Sustainability and knowledge: European environmental policy
                                                                        and the challenge of sustainability in a multilevel system, in: R. Atkinson, G. Terizakis & K. Zimmermann (Eds)




Downloaded by [Kungliga Tekniska Hogskola] at 14:38 08 October 2014
                                                                        Sustainability in European Environmental Policy: Challenges of Governance and Knowledge, pp. 11–32 (London,
                                                                        Routledge).
