[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: journal/T06-duranton-puga-2005-from-sectoral-to-functional-urban-specialisation-10.1016-j.jue.2004.12.002.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Title:           doi:10.1016/j.jue.2004.12.002
Creator:         Elsevier
Producer:        Acrobat Distiller 5.0 (Windows)
CreationDate:    Fri Feb 25 16:53:21 2005 WIB
ModDate:         Fri Feb 25 16:53:21 2005 WIB
Custom Metadata: no
Metadata Stream: yes
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            none
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           28
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       467.72 x 680.42 pts
Page rot:        0
File size:       249866 bytes
Optimized:       no
PDF version:     1.7
[Extracted Text]
                            Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2005) 343–370
                                                                                www.elsevier.com/locate/jue




     From sectoral to functional urban specialisation
                            Gilles Duranton a , Diego Puga b,∗
        a Department of Geography and Environment, London School of Economics, Houghton Street,
                                           London WC2A 2AE, UK
 b Department of Economics, University of Toronto, 150 Saint George Street, Toronto, ON, Canada M5S 3G7

                             Received 2 August 2002; revised 20 November 2004
                                       Available online 13 January 2005




Abstract
   Striking evidence is presented of a previously unremarked transformation of urban structure from
mainly sectoral to mainly functional specialisation. We offer an explanation showing that this trans-
formation is inextricably interrelated with changes in firms’ organisation. A greater variety of busi-
ness services for headquarters and of sector-specific intermediates for production plants within a city
reduces costs, while congestion increases with city size. A fall in the costs of remote management
leads to a transformation of the equilibrium urban and industrial structure. Cities shift from special-
ising by sector—with integrated headquarters and plants—to specialising mainly by function—with
headquarters and business services clustered in larger cities, and plants clustered in smaller cities.
 2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

JEL classification: R30; L23; R12

Keywords: Functional specialisation; Cities; Headquarters; Business services




1. Introduction

    Over the last few decades there has been a shift in the main dimension along which
cities specialise, from a specialisation by sector to a specialisation by function. Urban

 * Corresponding author.
   E-mail addresses: g.duranton@lse.ac.uk (G. Duranton), d.puga@utoronto.ca (D. Puga).
   URLs: http://cep.lse.ac.uk/~duranton, http://dpuga.economics.utoronto.ca.

0094-1190/$ – see front matter  2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jue.2004.12.002
344                 G. Duranton, D. Puga / Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2005) 343–370


Table 1
The diminishing sectoral specialisation and increasing functional specialisation of US cities
Local populationa           Sectoral                        Functional specialisation
                            specialisationb                 in management against productionc (%)
                            1977       1987      1997       1950             1970             1980             1990
5,000,000–19,397,717        0.377      0.376     0.374      +10.2             +22.1            +30.8            +39.0
1,500,000–4,999,999         0.366      0.360     0.362       +0.3             +11.0            +21.6            +25.7
500,000–1,499,999           0.397      0.390     0.382      −10.9              −7.8             −5.0             −2.1
250,000–499,999             0.409      0.389     0.376       −9.2              −9.5            −10.9            −14.2
75,000–249,999              0.467      0.442     0.410       −2.1              −7.9            −12.7            −20.7
67–75,000                   0.693      0.683     0.641       −4.0             −31.7            −40.4            −49.5
Source. Authors’ calculations based on data from County Business Patterns (sectoral specialisation) and Decen-
nial Census of Population and Housing (functional specialisation).
  a The units of analysis are Metro Areas plus those counties not included in any Metro Area. This covers
the entire continental US. For Metro Areas, county-level data has been aggregated into Metropolitan Statistical
Area/Consolidated Metropolitan Statistical Area outside New England and into New England County Metropol-
itan Area in New England using 2000 definitions. Individual Metro and Non-metro Areas have been allocated to
the same population class for the entire table on the basis of population data from the Decennial Census of 2000.
  b Mean value for each population class of a Gini index comparing the local and national distributions of em-
ployment shares across 2-digit SIC manufacturing sectors. If sh and s h are respectively the local and national
                                                                            
shares of employment in sector h, the Gini specialisation index is 12 h |sh − s h |. Its value is close to one if a
city is fully specialised in a sector that is very small at the national level and is equal to zero if local employment
is dispersed across sectors in the same way as national employment.
  c Percentage difference from the national average in the number of executives and managers per production
worker (occupied in precision production, fabrication, or assembly).


economists have traditionally paid much attention to the specialisation of individual cities
in a small number of sectors (see, e.g., Henderson [25]). While specialisation continues
to be an important feature of the urban system of the United States, cities are increas-
ingly distinguished by their functional specialisation (i.e., in management and services
versus production) rather than by their sectoral specialisation (i.e., in one particular sec-
tor of activity versus another one). This transformation of urban structure has so far been
unremarked. We provide striking evidence of it in Table 1.
    The left-hand side of the table shows that sectoral specialisation within manufacturing,
as measured by a Gini index, declined steadily for cities of all sizes between 1977 and
1997.1 The average US metro area saw its Gini index of sectoral specialisation decline
from 0.430 to 0.392 between 1977 and 1997.
    The right-hand side of Table 1 shows that this falling sectoral specialisation has been
mirrored by an increasing functional specialisation. We have computed the ratio of execu-
tives and managers to production workers (occupied in precision production, fabrication, or
assembly) in cities of each size class and calculated the percentage difference between this
ratio and the corresponding ratio for the entire nation. Working through the four columns in
sequence, we see that in 1950 cities were not too different in terms of their proportions of

 1 Alternative measures of specialisation show a similar decline over time as well as a greater specialisation of
smaller cities. Kim [29] looks at US Census Regions instead of cities over a longer time period and finds that
these have experienced a similar decline in their sectoral specialisation since the 1930s.
                    G. Duranton, D. Puga / Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2005) 343–370                           345


managers and production workers. And although the largest cities already housed relatively
more managers, there was no clear ranking by city size. By 1980 differences across cities
had increased substantially and a clear ranking by size had emerged: larger cities had be-
come specialised in management functions whereas smaller cities had become specialised
in production. This pattern became even more marked over the following decade. In 1990,
the nine largest US metro areas had 39% more managers per production worker than the
national average. For metro areas with a current population between 1.5 and 5 million, the
figure was 25.7% above the national average. At the other extreme, non-metro areas and
metro areas with less than a quarter of a million people had respectively 49.5 and 20.7%
fewer managers per production worker than the national average.
    In this paper we develop a formal framework that explains this urban transformation and
suggests that it is inextricably interrelated with changes in firms’ organisation. Specifically,
to the increasing separation of the management and production facilities of individual
firms. This separation is one of the most significant trends in the internal organisation of
firms of the last century (Chandler [7]).2 Kim [30] carefully documents this process in his
account of the rise of multi-location firms in the United States. The percentage of US manu-
facturing workers employed in multi-location firms increased from 51.4% in 1939 to 73.1%
in 1987. A crucial component of this rise of multi-location firms has been the growing im-
portance of separate establishments acting as headquarters. The number of stand-alone
headquarters and their employment rose by 78.9 and 68.9% respectively between 1958
and 1987—more than twice as fast as overall multi-location employment in manufacturing
over the same period.
    The decisions made by firms regarding their organisation (such as whether to be spa-
tially integrated or to split management and production across multiple locations) are not
made in a void. They are affected by the environment in which firms operate. And this
environment is in turn shaped by the cumulation of firms’ organisational choices. This pa-
per develops a simple general equilibrium model in which firms’ organisational choices
are endogenous and interrelated and studies the links between firms’ organisation and the
urban system.
    Our model (set up in Section 2) considers multiple final sectors, each made up of firms
with both headquarter and production activities. Each firm gains from integrating headquar-
ter and production in a single location because this saves in management costs. However,
depending on the urban structure, there may also be gains from becoming a multi-location
firm with headquarter and production establishments in different cities. This is because
cities with a wider range of business service suppliers are less costly places in which to
operate a headquarter. Similarly, the sharing of intermediate suppliers by production plants
reduces productions costs in cities with more same-sector suppliers. At the same time,
larger cities are more congested places which results in higher living costs. Workers are
mobile across cities and occupations, and the number and composition of cities are en-
dogenous.


 2 Another important trend has been firms’ increasing reliance on outside suppliers. This growth in outsourcing
has received wide attention in the literature (see Perry [40] for a survey) and is outside the scope of this paper, in
which we take the boundaries of the firm as given and focus on the location of activities within those boundaries.
346             G. Duranton, D. Puga / Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2005) 343–370


    We begin to solve the model by determining the types of cities that can exist in equi-
librium (Section 3). Then we derive both the equilibrium choice of organisational form by
firms and the equilibrium urban structure (Section 4). When the additional costs associated
with managing production from a remote headquarter are high, firms remain integrated.
Given the benefits of sharing intermediate suppliers and urban congestion costs, cities
host headquarters and production plants but specialise by sector. However, when the addi-
tional costs associated with managing production remotely fall below a certain level, for
which we provide a closed-form solution, both the organisation of firms and the urban
structure undergo profound changes. Firms previously organised as single units become
multi-unit organisations. In choosing where to locate their now separate establishments,
firms aim to place their headquarter in cities where business service employment is abun-
dant and their production plant in cities with a greater same-sector specialisation in final
production. Since similar organisational and location choices are made by a large num-
ber of firms, this in turn affects the employment patterns of cities, which is itself what
makes the organisational choice worthwhile. This leads to a shift in the main dimen-
sion along which cities specialise, from a specialisation by sector to a specialisation by
function. As a result of the benefits of sharing business service suppliers across firms
and sectors, headquarters from different sectors and business services cluster in a few
large cities. Manufacturing plants, for which localisation economies are weaker empir-
ically as well as in the model, cannot afford to pay high enough wages to compensate
for the high congestion costs. They move away and cluster in smaller separate cities.
We conclude the paper with some final remarks and suggestions for further work (Sec-
tion 5).
    Of the large theoretical literature dealing with the organisational and location choices
of firms, three particular streams are more closely related to our work. The the-
oretical literature on multinational enterprises has endogenised firms’ choice of lo-
cation for multiple facilities (Helpman [22] and Markusen [34] are two early ex-
amples, while Markusen [36] provides a survey). However, this line of work fo-
cuses on the location decisions of firms taking the environment in which they op-
erate as exogenous, whereas we are interested in determining firms’ operating en-
vironment endogenously as a general equilibrium outcome shaped by firms’ deci-
sions.
    More recently, a series of papers (e.g., Grossman and Helpman [20], Marin and
Verdier [33], Puga and Trefler [41], Antràs [4]) have developed general equilibrium
frameworks where both firms’ organisation and the market structure in which they op-
erate are endogenous. However, location choices are ignored so that there is unique
environment faced by all firms. Furthermore, the organisational choices on which
these papers focus concern ownership and power allocation. This paper instead takes
firm boundaries as given and asks whether firms locate their various internal facili-
ties in the same or in different geographical locations. Our paper thus deals with the
separation of firms’ activities in terms of geography rather than in terms of owner-
ship.
    Finally, in the urban economics literature, Davis [8] studies the location of production
relative to distribution facilities and natural resources. However, his focus is on the relative
magnitude of transport costs for final goods and for natural resources. More closely related
                G. Duranton, D. Puga / Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2005) 343–370       347


to this paper is the work of Ota and Fujita [38], who propose a model where firms make
decisions about the location of their facilities and these decisions in turn affect the urban
environment. However, their model deals only with location within a city, and is thus more
useful to understand differences between a city’s centre and its suburbs than differences
across cities in an urban system.
   In terms of empirical work, the shift from sectoral to functional urban specialisation that
we report does not seem to be specific to the US. Following the working paper version of
this paper, Bade et al. [6] have replicated the functional specialisation part of our Table 1
using German data for the period 1976–2002. They find that Germany has followed the
same pattern that we find for the US: increasing functional specialisation over time of
large cities in management activities and of smaller cities in production activities.
   Consistent with the predictions of our model, there is also evidence that, together with
management functions, larger cities have also absorbed business service employment as
well as headquarters. According to Kolko [31], in 1910 manufacturing accounted for about
six times as much employment as business services in all size-classes of US cities. Over
time this similarity across cities of different sizes has disappeared. There has been a grow-
ing concentration of manufacturing in small and medium-sized cities and of business
services in larger cities, to the extent that the ratio of manufacturing to business service
employment is now 4.5 times higher in non-metro areas than in metro areas with over 2.5
million people. Regarding headquarters, Shilton and Stanley [43] study the location of over
5000 headquarters in the US, and find that 40% of them are clustered in just 20 major urban
counties. In Japan, headquarters have also become increasingly concentrated in Tokyo and,
to a lesser extent, in Osaka, while mass-production activities have been gradually displaced
outside the major metropolitan areas (Fujita and Tabuchi [18], Fujita and Ishii [17]).
   More recent empirical studies find patterns in the location of headquarters and business
services that match various aspects of our model. First, according to Aarland et al. [1],
headquarters have a strong propensity to out-source business services. For US headquar-
ters, the expenditure on legal, accounting, and advertising services alone is equivalent to
more than two thirds of their wage bill. This is confirmed by Ono [37], who also shows that
the propensity of firms to rely on their headquarters to buy business services increases with
the size of the market surrounding them. Second, according to Davis and Henderson’s [9]
careful study using US Census data, headquarter location decisions are mostly driven by
the existence of a large and diverse local supply of business services rather than by the
presence of a large number of other headquarters. Furthermore, the agglomeration forces
linking headquarters and business services are very large relative to those estimated for
manufacturing. Third, Strauss-Khan and Vives [46] find that headquarters have tended to
change location over time along the lines implied by our model. They show that between
1996 and 2001 headquarters have moved away from locations with relatively few other
headquarters and business service producers towards locations with a greater presence of
both, whereas headquarters already in locations with relatively many other headquarters
and business service producers have tended to remain there.
348                    G. Duranton, D. Puga / Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2005) 343–370


2. The model

2.1. Preferences

   There are m sectors producing goods for final consumption. Consumers have Cobb–
Douglas preferences with equal shares of expenditure allocated to each of these sectors.
We use superscripts to index sectors as well as worker occupations (described below) and
subscripts to index cities. Thus, the indirect utility of a consumer working in occupation h
in city i is
               eih
       Vi =        ,                                                                                             (1)
               P
where eih denotes individual consumption expenditure,
              
              m
                 h 1/m
       P=        P                                                                                               (2)
              h=1

is the global consumer price index, and P h denotes the price of final goods in sector h.
The latter are freely tradeable across cities, hence their prices are common to all cities. All
workers in the economy are fully mobile across cities and occupations.

2.2. Technology

    The input–output structure of each final sector is represented schematically in Fig. 1.
Final-goods firms have two facilities: a headquarter and a production plant. Each firm
can adopt one of two organisational forms: spatially integrated or multi-location.3 Spa-
tially integrated firms have their headquarter and their production plant in the same city,
while multi-location firms have their headquarter and their production plant in different
cities. In either case, headquarters use labour (managers) and business services as inputs to
produce headquarter services. Production plants then combine these headquarter services
with sector-specific intermediate inputs to produce final goods. Both business services and
sector-specific intermediate inputs are produced by outside suppliers with labour, and are
non-tradeable across cities.4 However, while the same business services are used by head-
quarters in all sectors, the intermediates used by production plants differ across sectors.

  3 Note that throughout this paper integration is defined by the range of activities performed in the same location
by individual firms (spatial integration) and not by the range of activities performed inside as opposed to outside
the firm (organisational integration).
  4 Business services and sector-specific intermediate inputs are assumed non-tradeable for analytical tractability,
but the qualitative conclusions of the model would be unaffected if they were instead tradeable subject to iceberg
costs (this issue is further discussed in Section 4). Empirically, the proximity between business service suppli-
ers and the headquarters of their customers appears to be very important. Kolko [31] documents the increasing
concentration of business services in the largest cities, which also attract a disproportionate share of headquarters
(Shilton and Stanley [43]). Davis and Henderson [9] show that the presence of a wider variety of business service
has a very strong effect on the agglomeration of headquarters; however, this effect declines rapidly with distance,
taking place mostly within the same county.
                 G. Duranton, D. Puga / Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2005) 343–370         349




                             Fig. 1. Input–output structure of each sector.



For instance, the headquarters of apparel and automobile firms may work with the same
banks, lawyers and advertising agencies. But the car parts purchased by automobile facto-
ries, while perhaps also used by other automobile producers, are very different inputs from
the fabrics purchased by apparel factories.
   To formalise this input–output structure and to be able to speak meaningfully about sec-
toral as well as functional specialisation, it is convenient to define 2m + 1 occupations for
workers. We assign index 0 to workers employed in business services, and by extension to
firms in the business service sector; index h to workers directly employed by headquarters
in sector h for h = 1, . . . , m and to variables related to final production in that sector; and
index m + h to workers employed in the production of intermediate inputs specific to final
sector h for h = 1, . . . , m, as well as to firms producing those intermediates.
   Using this notation, we can now specify the details of firms’ technology. Final-goods
firms are perfectly competitive and have Cobb–Douglas technology, with cost shares η for
the headquarter and 1−η for the production plant. Thus, a sector h firm with its headquarter
in city i and its production plant in city j (where j might be equal to or different from i)
has a cost function given by
       h
      Ci,j = ci,j
              h    h
                  xi,j ,                                                                     (3)

       h denotes output,
where xi,j
             h η  m+h 1−η
       h
      ci,j = Hi,j   Qj                                                                       (4)

                               h is the headquarter sub-cost, and Qm+h is the production
is the unit production cost, Hi,j                                      j
plant sub-cost.
    Headquarter sub-costs are in turn split in a Cobb–Douglas fashion between labour
directly employed by the headquarter and business services purchased from external sup-
pliers, with sub-shares µ and 1 − µ respectively. There is an endogenously determined
mass si0 of business service varieties produced in city i. All varieties enter into headquar-
ters’ technology with constant elasticity of substitution (θ + 1)/θ , where θ > 0. Thus, for
350                 G. Duranton, D. Puga / Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2005) 343–370


an integrated firm with its headquarter and its production plant in the same city i the head-
quarter sub-cost is
                     µ  1−µ
         h
      Hi,i = Hih = wih Q0i         ,                                                      (5)
where wih denotes the wage per unit of labour for a worker employed in occupation h in
city i,
              si0                     −θ
                       0 −1/θ
      Q0i =            qi (k)   dk                                                          (6)
                0

is the relevant price index of business services in city i, qi0 (k) is the price of variety k of
business services produced in city i.
    Each firm needs to transmit headquarter services (such as organisational decisions, mar-
keting, or finance) to its production plant. The transmission of a firm’s headquarter services
to a production plant located in a different city involves iceberg costs (for instance, a
fraction of managers’ time is lost in travelling to visit the plant). Consequently, for a multi-
location firm with its headquarter in city i and its production plant in another city j the
headquarter input requirements are higher by a factor ρ > 1 than if it was an integrated
firm with both facilities in city i:
        h
      Hi,j = ρHih .                                                                         (7)
This is meant to capture that, as Kim [30] shows using US Census data, headquarter costs
are significantly higher for a multi-location firm than for a similarly-sized firm with inte-
grated headquarter and production.
   Production plants for final goods use sector-specific intermediate inputs. There is an
endogenously determined mass sim+h of intermediate inputs specific to sector h produced
in city i. All intermediate inputs specific to sector h enter into plants’ technology with
constant elasticity of substitution ( + 1)/, where  > 0. Thus, the relevant price index of
intermediate inputs specific to sector h in city i is
              sim+h                            −
                      m+h −1/
      Qm+h
       i   =          qi (k)     dk                   ,                                     (8)
                       0

where qim+h (k) is the price of intermediate input k specific to sector h in city i.
   Both business services and sector-specific intermediate inputs are produced by monop-
olistically competitive firms à la Dixit and Stiglitz [11]. The cost function of a business
service firm producing variety k in city i is
                                 
       Ci0 (k) = α 0 + β 0 yi0 (k) wi0 ,                                                (9)
where yi0 (k) denotes the firm’s output. The expression in brackets is the unit labour re-
quirement, which has both a fixed and a variable component. Thus, there are increasing
returns to scale in the production of each variety of business services. Similarly, the cost
function of an intermediate firm producing variety k specific to sector h in city i is
                                 
      Cim+h (k) = α + βyim+h (k) wim+h .                                                (10)
                   G. Duranton, D. Puga / Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2005) 343–370     351


   Note that the benefits of sharing differentiated intermediate input suppliers will en-
courage agglomerations of production plants just like the benefits of sharing business
service suppliers will encourage agglomerations of headquarters. Alternative microeco-
nomic foundations for these agglomeration forces are possible (Duranton and Puga [13]).
In particular, we could model the agglomeration of headquarter as the result of their work-
ers becoming more productive through closer interactions with other headquarter workers,
as in Ota and Fujita [38]. This would however lead to similar results. Specifying the same
micro-foundations for agglomeration economies in business services/headquarters as in
intermediates/production plants eases the exposition and the sharing of suppliers has the
advantage that it is a particularly tractable source of agglomeration. More importantly, re-
cent empirical evidence suggests that the presence of a large and diverse local supply of
business services is the strongest determinant of the agglomeration of headquarters (Davis
and Henderson [9]).

2.3. Internal urban structure

   We model the internal spatial structure of cities in the simplest standard fashion. Pro-
duction in each city takes place at a central point, defined as the Central Business District
(CBD). Surrounding this, there is a line with residences of unit length. Residents commute
from their residence to the CBD and back, losing in the process a fraction of their unit
labour supply equal to 2τ times the distanced travelled. Each consumer chooses her place
of residence so as to maximise utility, given her occupation and income, and the bid-rent
curve in the city. Because of fixed lot size, this is equivalent to choosing residence so as
to maximise net income. Thus, a consumer working in occupation h in city i maximises
wih (1 − 2τ z) − Ri (z) with respect to z, where z is the distance to the CBD and Ri (z) is the
differential land rent in city i for a residence located at distance z from the CBD.
   The possibility of arbitrage across residential locations both within and across occupa-
tions ensures that at the residential equilibrium the sum of commuting cost and land rent
expenditures is the same for all residents with the same wage; that workers sort themselves
according to their wage, with higher-paid workers (who have a higher opportunity cost of
commuting time) living closer to the CBD; that the city is symmetric and the city edges
are at a distance Li /2 of the CBD (where Li is total population in city i); and that land
rent function (i.e., the upper envelope of all bid-rent functions) is continuous, convex, and
piecewise linear. Land rent at the city edges is normalised to zero. Integrating land rent
over the city yields total land rent:
               i /2
               L

      Ri =             Ri (z) dz.                                                         (11)
             −Li /2

   Let us denote net labour available at the CBD of city i in occupation h by lih . This
is equal to Lhi minus the total commuting time incurred by workers in this occupation.
Summing across occupations immediately implies:
      2m
            lih = Li (1 − τ Li ).                                                         (12)
      h=0
352             G. Duranton, D. Puga / Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2005) 343–370


2.4. The cost of headquarters and production plants

  Before we proceed to describe the mechanism for city creation, let us derive in two
Lemmas simplified expressions for the cost of production plants and headquarters in final-
goods sectors.

Lemma 1 (The cost of production plants). The production plant sub-cost of a sector h
integrated firm in city i is
                      −
      Qm+h
        i     = lim+h wim+h .

Proof. By Shephard’s Lemma, demand for each variety of intermediates is
                     h                              η            −(+1)/ 
                    ∂Cj,i                    Hih         qim+h
      yim+h =                dj = (1 − η)                                      xj,i dj,   (13)
                    ∂qim+h                  Qm+h
                                             i           Qm+h
                                                          i
where we have dropped index k since all variables take identical values for all intermediate
suppliers in the same sector and city. It follows from (13) that the elasticity of demand
for each intermediate with respect to a firm’s own price is −( + 1)/, so that the profit-
maximising price for each intermediate is a fixed relative markup over marginal cost:
      qim+h = ( + 1) βwim+h .                                                            (14)
Free entry and exit in intermediates drives maximised profits to zero. From the zero profit
condition, the only level of output in intermediate production consistent with zero profits
is
                α
      yim+h =     .                                                                   (15)
               β
Demand for labour by intermediate producers can be obtained by application of Shephard’s
Lemma to (10) and integration over varieties as
                       ∂ Cih                              +1
      lim+h = sim+h            = sim+h α + βyim+h = sim+h α     ,                         (16)
                      ∂wim+h                                 
where (15) has been substituted in to yield the final expression. By choice of units of
intermediate output, we can set β = (/α) ( + 1)−(+1) . Using (16) and (14), the price
indices of (8) simplify into
                           −1/ −  m+h − m+h
      Qm+h
        i    = sim+h qim+h            = li      wi .        2                        (17)

    As in Fujita [15] and Abdel-Rahman and Fujita [2], in our model there is a monopo-
listically competitive intermediate sector that hires workers and sells non-tradeable inter-
mediates to final-goods producers. A larger workforce employed in any given intermediate
sector m + h of a city leads to a wider range of intermediates being produced for use in
final-good sector h. Since these intermediates enter the production function of final-good
producers in sector h with the same constant elasticity of substitution ( + 1)/, a wider
range of available intermediates results in lower production costs in this final-good sector.
                    G. Duranton, D. Puga / Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2005) 343–370                      353


Hence, despite constant returns to scale at the firm level in final production, there are ag-
gregate increasing returns at the sector-city level, also known as localisation economies.
The strength of these increases with .

Lemma 2 (The cost of headquarters). The headquarter sub-cost of a sector h integrated
firm in city i is
               µ  1−µ
       Hih = wih Q0i      ,
where
             −θ 0
       Q0i = li0 wi .

   The proof of this lemma mirrors closely that of Lemma 1 and is thus relegated to Appen-
dix A. The sharing of business services by headquarters, like the sharing of intermediate
suppliers by plants, gives rise to localisation economies, whereby a larger workforce em-
ployed in a city’s business service sector leads to a wider range of business services being
produced, which in turn results in lower costs of operating headquarters. Since business
services account for a fraction 1 − µ of headquarter costs, these localisation economies
increase with θ (1 − µ). Furthermore, since by (7) multi-location firms face the same price
index for business services as integrated firms, these localisation economies apply under
either organisational form. Note that, since business service suppliers are shared by firms
in different sectors, an increase in business service employment in a city reduces costs for
local headquarters from all sectors. An increase in employment by intermediate suppliers,
on the other hand, only reduces costs for local production plants in the sector using those
intermediates.

2.5. City formation

    To complete the model, we need to specify a mechanism for city formation. The sim-
plest alternative is to consider perfectly competitive land development companies or land
developers. At the same time, active municipal governments with tax raising powers can
play an equivalent role that would lead to identical results.5 In fact, all we require to obtain
our results is some mechanism that prevents urban configurations that are sustainable only
under a coordination failure from arising in equilibrium—for instance, situations in which
no one moves away from inefficiently large cities for fear of no one else following.
    For simplicity, we also want to avoid lumpiness problems, such as sectors being smaller
than the smallest city. We thus assume a large economy in which there is a continuum of
land developers, not all of which will be active in equilibrium (since there is a discrete
number of equal-sized industries, the assumption of a continuum of cities guarantees that
no industry will be smaller than the smallest city in equilibrium). Each developer controls
all land in several potential sites for a city. Land developers can give occupation-specific

 5 See Fujita [16] and Henderson and Becker [26] for discussions of this issue and for an equivalence result
between these two types of institutions. Henderson and Mitra [27] discuss the practical relevance of large agents
in city formation.
354                     G. Duranton, D. Puga / Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2005) 343–370


subsidies to workers. Let us denote by Tih the subsidy given by the developer in city i
to workers with occupation h. Before workers choose their occupation and sector, land
developers announce the sites at which they wish to develop cities, the aggregate population
and the distribution across occupations that they wish to attain.6 There is free entry and
perfect competition amongst land developers. When active, each land developer seeks to
maximise total land rent in its city, as given by (11), net of any transfer paid to workers in
each occupation:
                                           2m
         max Πi ,           Π i = Ri −           Tih Lhi ,                                                      (18)
       {Lhi ,Tih }                         h=0
subject to workers in each active occupation in the city obtaining the highest consumption
income available elsewhere, ē:
       Lhi eih = Lhi ē,        Lhi ⩾ 0,                                                                        (19)
and subject also to firms with only their headquarter, only their production plant, or both
facilities, in the city breaking even:
                   
                                 η    1−η                      η      1−η
             xi,j dj P h − ρHih Qm+h
              h
                                                 = 0,     P h − ρHih Qm+h            ⩽ 0,
        i=j
                
                       h
                      xi,j dj ⩾ 0,                                                                              (20)
               i=j
                         
                            h     η    1−η                                   η    1−η
                 h
                xj,i dj     P − ρH h Qm+hi        = 0,                    P h − ρH h Qm+hi      ⩽ 0,
        i=j
                
                       h
                      xj,i dj ⩾ 0,                                                                              (21)
               i=j
            h  h η  m+h 1−η                                  η     1−η
       h
      xi,i  P − Hi     Qi          = 0,                      P h − Hih Qm+h
                                                                         i       ⩽ 0,
                h
               xi,i ⩾ 0,                                                                                        (22)
                            
                          h dj aggregates the output of multi-location firms across all
where the integral i=j xi,j
cities, and Qm+h denotes the lowest sub-cost for a final-sector stand-alone plant elsewhere

 6 The reason why developers need to announce population targets as well as subsidy levels is that otherwise
too many workers might gather in too few cities relative to what developers aimed to achieve. This is because
of a well-known co-ordination problem associated with city formation (Henderson [24]; see also Henderson and
Becker [26] for a careful discussion of this issue and a more detailed characterisation of the land developers’
problem). Note also that there is a one-to-one mapping between the number of workers in each occupation in
the city and its firm composition. Hence, unlike in some models where individual firms use multiple primary
factors (e.g., Henderson and Becker [26]), transfers to workers are an adequate instrument for developers to
manipulate the production externality created by intermediate and business service suppliers to their advantage.
Note that subsidies targeted at particular sectors or particular activities (e.g., headquarters, production facilities
or research centres) are very common in practice. See Helsley and Strange [23] and Henderson and Becker [26]
for discussions of the instruments of control and the extent of ownership of land developers.
                   G. Duranton, D. Puga / Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2005) 343–370                     355


and ρH h denotes the lowest sub-cost for a final-sector stand-alone headquarter elsewhere.
Note that the worker participation constraint of (19) is binding because of free worker mo-
bility, which ensures that in equilibrium workers collect the same net returns everywhere.
Similarly, the firm participation constraints of (20)–(22) are also binding.
    Consumers are Arrow–Debreu shareholders in all firms and in all land development
companies. However, free entry by firms and land developers drives their profits to zero in
equilibrium. Thus, the equilibrium consumption expenditure of a worker with occupation h
in city i living at a distance z from the CBD is the sum of wage income and any transfer,
minus land rent expenditures:
       eih (z) = wih (1 − 2τ z) + Tih − Ri (z).                                                          (23)
    To solve the model, it is useful to note that the developer’s programme is equivalent to a
situation in which the developer maximises the gap between the pre-transfer consumption
expenditure of workers in the city and the post-transfer income which they could obtain
elsewhere, subject to zero profit by firms and a feasibility constraint.

Lemma 3 (Equivalent developer’s programme). The developer’s programme is equivalent
to
                            2m
       max Πi ,     Πi =          wih lih − Li ē,
        {lih }              h=0

subject to (20)–(22), lih ⩾ 0 and (12).

Proof. Integrating
                      (23) over population in the city and using (11) and (12) yields
Lhi eih = 2m    w h l h + 2m T h Lh − R . Substituting the worker participation constraint
            h=0 i i         h=0 i i         i
of the original programme, Lhi eih = Lhi ē, into this expression implies transfers such that
2m h h                 2m h h
    h=0 Ti Li = Ri −       h=0 wi li + Li ē. Inserting this into the original programme (18)
                                        h

yields the result. 2

   By lowering transfers down to the point where every worker gets ē, a developer can
extract any surplus consumption income of workers in its city over that available elsewhere.
Hence it is in the developer’s interest to achieve an urban configuration such that workers
obtain the highest possible pre-transfer consumption income, thus maximising the total
wage bill in the city, and simply set transfers to extract the surplus.7


3. Equilibrium types and sizes of cities

    In this section we show that in equilibrium there can be at most three types of cities:
cities with only stand-alone headquarters and their business service suppliers, cities with

 7 Note also that the second-order conditions of this equivalent developer’s programme ensure that, in equilib-
rium, population constraints do not need to be enforced by the developer (i.e., a small change in the mass of
workers with a given occupation will result in a reduction in their utility).
356             G. Duranton, D. Puga / Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2005) 343–370


only stand-alone production plants in one sector and their intermediate suppliers, and
cities with only integrated firms in one sector and their business service and intermedi-
ate suppliers. This is done in three steps. First, we show that in equilibrium no city has
both stand-alone headquarters and stand-alone plants belonging to multi-location firms
(Lemma 4). This still leaves the possibility of cities with a combination of headquarters
from multi-location firms and integrated firms or a combination of production plants from
multi-location firms and integrated firms operating in any combination of sectors. Our sec-
ond step is therefore to show that in equilibrium no city hosts production plants in more
than one sector (Lemma 5). That narrows down cities to five possible types:

  (i) cities with only integrated firms in one sector,
 (ii) cities with only headquarters from multi-location firms,
(iii) cities with only production plants from multi-location plants in one sector,
(iv) cities with production plants of both multi-location firms and integrated firms in one
      sector, and
 (v) cities with both headquarters of multi-location firms and integrated firms.

Our third step is to rule out the last two types of cities, by showing that a city with in-
tegrated firms has neither headquarters nor production plants belonging to multi-location
firms (Lemma 6). We then proceed in the following section to study which of the three
remaining possible types of cities exist in equilibrium depending on parameters.

Lemma 4 (Multi-location headquarter and plant separation). In equilibrium, stand-alone
headquarters and stand-alone plants belonging to multi-location firms do not coexist in
the same city.

Proof. Consider a city with stand-alone headquarters and production plants in the same
sector. Then, from Eqs. (20) and (21), Hih = H h and Qim+h = Qm+h = (P h )1/(1−η) ×
(ρH h )−η/(1−η) . But then an integrated firm operating in the same city and sector would
make profits equal to P h − (Hih )η (Qim+h )1−η = (1 − 1/ρ η )P h > 0, which contradicts (22).
Consider now a city with stand-alone production plants in sector h and stand-alone head-
quarters in a different sector h . By Lemmas 1, 2, and 3, a developer can transfer head-
quarter resources from sector h to sector h without affecting localisation economies in the
production of either business services or sector-specific intermediates, nor its own profits.
This will create the same profit opportunity from firm integration, which the developer can
appropriate by lowering transfers. 2

   This lemma rules out the existence of cities hosting stand-alone headquarters and stand-
alone production plants from different multi-location firms. Its intuition is the following.
The headquarters of multi-location firms only locate in a city if it provides the lowest head-
quarter cost available anywhere. Similarly, the production plants of multi-location firms
only locate in a city if it provides the corresponding intermediates at the lowest cost. If a
city were to provide both the lowest headquarter cost and the lowest costs for production
plants for multi-location firms in the same sector and they broke even, then multi-location
firms with either a headquarter or a production plant in the city would make positive pro-
                 G. Duranton, D. Puga / Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2005) 343–370     357


fits by becoming integrated firms—thus saving on the transmission cost for headquarter
services. The local developer could then capture the rents from this unexploited profit op-
portunity by lowering transfers, thus forcing firms to pay higher wages so that worker
income stays at ē. Therefore, in equilibrium, headquarters and plants belonging to multi-
location firms in the same sector do not coexist in the same city. Since resources used
by headquarters, either directly or indirectly, can be shifted across sectors without chang-
ing given wages, headquarters and plants belonging to multi-location firms do not coexist
in the same city even for different sectors. In effect, multi-location firms exist to exploit
the advantages of different types of cities for headquarters and production plants, so the
headquarters and production plants of multi-location firms are always located in different
cities.
    Following Lemma 4, it is still possible to envision cities with a combination of head-
quarters from multi-location firms and integrated firms or a combination of production
plants from multi-location firms and integrated firms operating in any combination of sec-
tors. As a further restriction of the equilibrium set, the next Lemma shows that cities must
be specialised in their final production.


Lemma 5 (Production specialisation). In equilibrium, each city hosts production plants in
at most one sector.


Proof. Consider a developer choosing how to allocate across sectors the local amount
of
mlabourm+hengaged in intermediate production. By Lemma         3, this involves maximising
   h=1 wi     lim+h subject to (20)–(22) and keeping m         lim+h constant. By Lemma 1,
                  m+h                                   h=1
wim+h = Qm+hi     li      . Changing the allocation of labour across occupations m to 2m in
any city does not change any price, P h , nor any headquarter cost, Hih . Consequently, by
(20)–(22), it does not affect the Qm+h
                                   i    consistent with zero profits. Hence, in choosing how
to allocate across sectors the local amount of labour engaged in intermediate production,
the developer maximises

       m                    m
                                        m+h 1+
            wim+h lim+h =         Qm+h
                                   i    li                                              (24)
      h=1                   h=1

                    
for given Qm+h
           i    and m       m+h
                       h=1 li   . The convexity of this expression implies that all labour
producing intermediates in any given city is allocated to a single sector. 2


   This result is reminiscent of Henderson [24]. Recall that, because of its ability to ex-
tract any surplus consumption income of workers in its city, each developer behaves as if
maximising the total wage bill in the city. With no equilibrium firm profits this implies
maximising the value of production in the city. In the presence of localisation economies,
final output in any given city and sector rises more than proportionately with employ-
ment in that city and sector. Maximisation of the value of production thus implies a corner
358                  G. Duranton, D. Puga / Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2005) 343–370


solution for the allocation across sectors of labour employed in intermediate production.
Consequently, any city that hosts plants hosts them in only one sector.8
   From Lemmas 4 and 5, only five types of cities are possible:

  (i) cities with only integrated firms in one sector,
 (ii) cities with only headquarters from multi-location firms,
(iii) cities with only production plants from multi-location plants in one sector,
(iv) cities with both production plants of multi-location firms and integrated firms, and
 (v) cities with both headquarters of multi-location firms and integrated firms.

The next lemma rules out the last two types of cities and shows that cities must be spe-
cialised by organisational form.

Lemma 6 (Specialisation by type of firms). In equilibrium, each city hosts either only
final-sector headquarters and business service suppliers, only final-sector manufacturing
plants and intermediate suppliers, or only integrated firms plus business services and in-
termediate suppliers.

                                              µ       1−µ               θ(1−µ)
Proof. By Lemma 2, we have (wih ) (wi0 )         = Hih (li0 )    . By Shephard’s Lemma,
          m
we have h=1 wi li = (µ/(1 − µ))wi li . Combining these two equations yields wi0 li0 =
                   h  h                0 0
                     (1+θ)(1−µ) m         1/µ   µ
(µ/(1 − µ))−µ (li0 )           [ h=1 (Hih ) lih ] . By inspection of this expression we can
see that profit maximisation by land developers requires Hih = Hi for all h such that lih > 0.
Hence
        m                                                              m          µ
                                                   
             wih lih = µ−µ (1 − µ)−(1−µ) Hi li0
                                                (1+θ)(1−µ)
                                                                            lih       .                    (25)
       h=0                                                            h=1
                                                                                             m      h
Maximisation of this component of the developer’s programme for given                           h=0 li shows
that
        m
                            µ
             lih =                  l0.                                                                    (26)
                     (1 + θ )(1 − µ) i
       h=1
Substituting (24)–(26) and Lemma 5 into the developer’s programme of Lemma 3, we can
rewrite this as
                            (1 + θ )−µ  0 1+θ(1−µ)           m+h 1+
            max Πi , Πi =             Hi li          + Qm+h    li        − Li ē, (27)
      {li0 ,lih ,lim+h }      1−µ                         i


subject to (20)–(22), lih ⩾ 0 and (12).
   To prove the lemma, it is sufficient to show that cities with both production plants
of multi-location firms and integrated firms, and cities with both headquarters of multi-

 8 In practice, while many cities are narrowly specialised, some are quite diversified. However, this has much to
do with the relative advantages of diversity and specialisation for innovation and production, an issue which is
outside the scope of this paper (see Duranton and Puga [12]).
                G. Duranton, D. Puga / Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2005) 343–370        359


location firms and integrated firms incompatible with profit maximisation by the devel-
opers. By (20)–(22), in a city with both integrated firms and production plants of multi-
location firms, (ρH h )η (Qm+h
                            i   )1−η = (Hi )η (Qm+h
                                                 i   )1−η = P h , and hence Hi = ρH h and
Qi m+h
        = (P )
             h 1/(1−η) (ρH )h −η/(1−η) =Q   m+h . Similarly, in a city with both integrated
firms and headquarters of multi-location firms, (ρHi )η (Qm+h )1−η = (Hi )η (Qm+hi    )1−η =
P , and hence Hi = (1/ρ)(P ) (Q
   h                           h 1/η   m+h )−(1−η)/η  = H and Qi
                                                          h        m+h
                                                                       =ρ   η/(1−η) Q m+h . In
                       m+h
either case, Hi and Qi     are pinned down by the firm participation constraints, and hence
they are taken as given by the developer when implementing the programme of (27). By in-
spection of (27), given that θ > 0 and  > 0, a configuration with both integrated firms and
production plants of multi-location firms in the same city cannot be an equilibrium, since
the developer would do better either by having only production plants or by having no
production plants except those needed to have integrated firms. Similarly, a configuration
with both integrated firms and headquarters of multi-location firms in the same city cannot
be an equilibrium, since the developer would do better either by having only headquarters
or by having no headquarters except those needed to have integrated firms. 2

    Localisation economies in the production of both business services and sector-specific
intermediates imply that a profit-maximising developer will avoid mixing headquarters
and production plants in a city, except possibly if these belong to integrated firms—due to
the lower headquarter requirements associated with integrated firms. Having reduced the
possible city types to three, we can now derive the equilibrium size of the different types of
cities. Let us denote by subscripts M, H , and I , variables corresponding to cities hosting
only production plants for multi-location firms, only headquarters for multi-location firms,
and only integrated firms, respectively.

Lemma 7 (Equilibrium city sizes). In equilibrium, cities hosting only final-sector produc-
tion plants and intermediate suppliers (if any) have a population
                  
      LM =              ;
             τ (1 + 2)
cities hosting only final-sector headquarters and business service suppliers (if any) have a
population
                   σ
       LH =               ;
              τ (1 + 2σ )
and cities hosting only integrated firms plus business services and intermediate suppliers
(if any) have a population
                  γ
       LI =              ;
             τ (1 + 2γ )
where σ ≡ θ (1 − µ), and γ ≡ ηθ (1 − µ) + (1 − η).

    The proof of this lemma is relegated to Appendix B. As is standard in the literature, there
is a trade-off between commuting costs (τ ) and the extent of aggregate increasing returns
in the city (, σ , or γ ). Here, aggregate increasing returns arise despite constant-returns
360                 G. Duranton, D. Puga / Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2005) 343–370


technology in final production due to the sharing of intermediate suppliers in cities with
production plants of multi-location firms, due to the sharing of business service suppliers
in cities with headquarters of multi-location firms, and due to the sharing of both types of
suppliers in cities with integrated firms. The ability of competitive developers to control the
composition of the workforce in their city and to extract any surplus makes them efficient.
At the competitive equilibrium, cities will thus be of optimal size conditional on their type.9
This size increases with the intensity of increasing returns and decreases with the cost of
commuting. To achieve optimal city size, developers must make transfers to local workers
so as to cover the gap between the value of their private and social marginal products. With
zero profits for developers, total land rents equal total transfers, and thus are just enough
to cover that gap. This is known as the Henry George Theorem and is a standard result in
urban economics, both in the context of production subject to local aggregate increasing
returns (Serck-Hanssen [42], Starrett [44], Vickrey [47]) and in the context of local public
goods (Flatters et al. [14], Stiglitz [45], Arnott and Stiglitz [5]). In the current context
it implies that, in equilibrium, all cities achieve optimal size, and developers transfer all
land rents in their city to local workers, filling the gap between the private and the public
marginal product of labour.


4. From sectoral to functional urban specialisation

   It is now possible to derive our main result. The choice of organisational form by firms
as well as the urban structure depend on how much higher is the cost of providing head-
quarter services to a plant in a different city as compared to a plant in the same city (ρ).

Proposition 1 (Equilibrium firm organisation and urban structure). If ρ > ρ̂, where
                                                                                 1/η
                             (1 + 2γ )1+2γ σ ησ  (1−η)
       ρ̂ ≡                                                                            ,
                γ γ [ησ (1 + 2σ )1+2σ ]η [(1 − η) (1 + 2)1+2 ]1−η
then all firms adopt an integrated organisational form, and all cities specialise by sector,
hosting headquarters and production plants plus business service and intermediate sup-
pliers. If instead ρ < ρ̂ then all firms adopt a multi-location organisational form, and all
cities specialise by function, with a share
                  η(1 + 2σ )
       η(1 + 2σ ) + (1 − η)(1 + 2)σ

  9 It is only because the economy is large that cities can reach their optimal size regardless of the urban con-
figuration (i.e., the number of cities of each type). Having instead a small economy creates a lumpiness problem
whereby cities in equilibrium are typically larger than their optimal size (since any size below optimum city size
is unstable) and the relative inefficiency of equilibrium city sizes depends on the configuration. Thus, in a small
economy the main result derived in Section 4 would not depend on the comparison of the optimal city sizes but on
the comparison of the optimal sizes subject to the lumpiness constraint (which converge to the the optimal sizes
as the economy grows arbitrarily large). In the more pathological case of very small sectors consuming a large
share of business services, Lemma 5 may not even hold as some cities may find it worthwhile to host production
plants of integrated firms in two or more sectors so that they can share the costs of business services. For further
discussion of these issues, see Papageorgiou and Pines [39].
                    G. Duranton, D. Puga / Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2005) 343–370                   361


of cities hosting headquarters from any sector plus business service suppliers, and the re-
maining cities hosting production plants plus intermediate suppliers from the same sector,
with equal proportions of cities specialised in production in each of the m sectors.

Proof. From (4), (7), and Lemmas 2 and 1, the equilibrium unit production cost for multi-
location firms is
                h ηµ  0 η(1−µ)  m+h 1−η  0 −ησ  m+h −(1−η)
       h
      cM  = ρ η wH      wH          wM         lH       lM            .             (28)
Dividing this by the unit production cost for integrated firms of (B.14) yields
                  
       h
      cM       ρ η
          =         ,                                                                                    (29)
      cIh      ρ̂
where
                       ηµ          η(1−µ)            1−η         −ησ            −(1−η) 1/η
                  wIh          wI0              wIm+h          lI0           lIm+h
      ρ̂ ≡         h            0                m+h            0             m+h
                                                                                                     .   (30)
                  wH           wH               wM             lH            lM
The firm participation constraints of (20)–(22) imply that to be sustainable cities must
offer firms the possibility of producing at the lowest available unit cost. If ρ > ρ̂ then
 h > ch , all firms adopt an integrated organisational form, and every city hosts head-
cM       I
quarters and production plants, which by Lemma 5 belong to the same sector, plus their
                                                                     h < ch , all firms adopt
business service and intermediate suppliers. If instead ρ < ρ̂ then cM     I
a multi-location organisational form, and every city either hosts headquarters from any
sector plus their business service suppliers or hosts production plants, which by Lemma 5
belong to the same sector, plus their intermediate suppliers. By Shephard’s Lemma,
wH0 l 0 = ((1 − µ)/µ)w h l h . From this, (26), and Lemma 5,
     H                  H H
         h
        wH
         0
              = 1 + θ.                                                                                   (31)
        wH
The developer’s programme of Lemma 3, together with the exhaustion of developers’ prof-
its due to free entry imply
            1                              1                                 m+h m+h
                w 0 l 0 = LI ē,             w 0 l 0 = LH ē,               wM  lM = LM ē.              (32)
        η(1 − µ) I I                      1−µ H H
From (B.16), (31), and (32),
        wIh       wI0          0
                          ηLI lH          wIm+h                   m+h
                                                       (1 − η)LI lM
          h
            =        =            ,            m+h
                                                   =                    .                                (33)
        wH         0
                  wH      LH lI 0
                                          wM              LM lIm+h
Substituting (B.6), (B.10), (B.22), (B.24), (33), and Lemma 7 into (30) and simplifying
yields the value of ρ̂ given in the proposition. Denote by NH the mass of cities that host
headquarters of multi-location firms and by NM the mass of cities that host production
plants of multi-location firms when ρ < ρ̂. By Shephard’s Lemma,
           0 l0 N
          wH  H H              η(1 − µ)
                           =            .
         m+h m+h
        wM  lM N M              1−η
362             G. Duranton, D. Puga / Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2005) 343–370


Combining this with (32) yields the share of cities that host only headquarters when ρ < ρ̂
as
               η(1 + 2σ )
                                      .
    η(1 + 2σ ) + (1 − η)(1 + 2)σ
The remaining cities specialise in production and, by symmetry, there are equal proportions
of cities specialised in each of the m sectors. 2

4.1. Discussion

    In our model, firms face a trade-off between the gains from integrating their headquarter
and production plant and the gains from separating them. The gains from integration stem
from lower headquarter requirements. The gains from separation arise from the lower costs
of operating headquarters in cities with a higher specialisation in business services, and
the lower costs of operating production plants in cities with a higher specialisation in the
corresponding intermediates.
    When the transmission cost for headquarter services is high, firms remain integrated.
Because of localisation economies in production and urban congestions costs increasing
with size, this in turn leads cities to specialise by sector. In contrast, when the transmission
cost for headquarter services is low, firms wish to locate their headquarter in cities where
business service employment is abundant and their production plant in cities with a greater
same-sector specialisation in final production. And it is in the interest of profit-maximising
developers to make it feasible for firms to implement this separation. Since the same or-
ganisational choice is made by a large number of firms, it in turn affects the employment
patterns of cities, which is itself what makes the organisational choice worthwhile. As a
result, some cities specialise in headquarters and business services and others in final and
intermediate production, the latter also being specialised by sector.
    Many business and economic historians have argued that the extra costs of coordinat-
ing and monitoring multi-location firms relative to integrated firms has decreased very
significantly following key technological developments in transport and communication
technologies, as well as new management practices (Chandler [7], Kim [30]). The cost
of transporting goods, people, and ideas has declined dramatically over the last century.
For instance, maritime freight in 1990 was only one third as costly as in 1920, while for
air-travel the revenue per passenger-mile in 1990 was one sixth of what it was in 1930.
Large as they may seem, these changes are dwarfed by the free fall in telecommunication
costs: the cost of a three-minute telephone conversation between New York and London
fell by 98.7% between 1930 and 1990 (Jones [28]). According to Yates [48,49], manage-
rial and accounting innovations have played an even greater role than the sheer reduction
in the cost of physical distance. Of particular importance has been the development of du-
plicators of various types, such as the typewriter together with the use of carbon copies,
and later the photocopying and fax machines, and e-mail. Such duplicators have made the
transmission of information along a managerial hierarchy and across space much faster
and much cheaper. Other recent developments in information technologies, such as online
stock monitoring and ordering have also facilitated management over large distances. On
the whole, it seems that this reduction in the cost of coordination and monitoring across dis-
                    G. Duranton, D. Puga / Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2005) 343–370                        363




                         Fig. 2. Unit costs of multi-location relative to integrated firms.


tant locations can to a very large extent be taken as exogenous to the rise of multi-location
firms.
   This reduction in the additional costs related to remote management can be simply
represented in the model as a reduction in ρ. Figure 2 plots the unit production cost of
multi-location firms (cM ) relative to the unit production cost of integrated firms (cI ) as
a function of ρ.10 When ρ is above ρ̂, any developer attempting to set up cities with ei-
ther only headquarters or only production plants cannot attract firms in the face of the
competition from developers in cities hosting only integrated firms, which offer lower unit
production costs. Thus every firm adopts an integrated organisational structure and every
city hosts headquarters and production plants from one sector. By Proposition 1, when
ρ falls below ρ̂ cities with either only headquarters or only production plants of multi-
location firms offer a combined unit cost below that available in integrated cities. Firms
previously organised as a single unit become multi-unit organisations. Multi-unit firms
locate their headquarters separately from their own production plants, but close to other
headquarters and business service firms. They also locate their plants close to other manu-
facturing facilities with which they can share intermediate suppliers. This leads to a change
in urban structure, with a shift in the main dimension along which cities specialise, from a
specialisation by sector to a specialisation by function.11

10 The figure plots (29) for ρ̂ given by Proposition 1 with parameters σ = 0.07 (a 1% increase in employment in
a city hosting headquarters and business services increases local productivity by 1.07%),  = 0.05 (a 1% increase
in employment in a city hosting only production plants and intermediate suppliers increases local productivity by
1.05%), and η = 0.2 (headquarters account for 20% of total costs). By symmetry, superscript h has been dropped
from cMh and ch . Note that, by (B.14) and (28), c varies with ρ but c does not. With these parameter values, the
                I                                 M                   I
change in firms’ organisation and in urban structure takes place when the additional costs of remote management
fall below 17.3% of the management costs for an integrated firm (ρ̂ = 1.173).
11 While the model predicts recent changes in firms’ organisation and in the urban structure, it presents these
as happening suddenly as ρ falls below a certain threshold. The catastrophic aspect of these changes is due to
the stylised nature of the model. A smoother transition could be obtained with a sector-specific cost of separating
364                 G. Duranton, D. Puga / Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2005) 343–370


    In practice, localisation economies are likely to be stronger for business services than for
manufacturing intermediates (see Markusen [35] for a conceptual discussion of this issue
and Dekle and Eaton [10] and Davis and Henderson [9] for empirical evidence). In terms
of the model, this simply requires that σ > . In this case, it follows from Lemma 7 and
Proposition 1 that when cities specialise by function, headquarters and business services
becomes concentrated in larger cities and manufacturing production gets located in smaller
cities (with σ > , LH > LI > LM ).12 All of this provides a consistent explanation for the
stylised facts documented in the introduction.
    While improvements in physical transportation technologies have facilitated the disper-
sion of manufacturing activities, improvements in telecommunication technologies may
have the opposite effect on business services and other knowledge-intensive activities
(Leamer and Storper [32]). Because of the complementarity between telecommunication
and face-to-face contact (as evidenced for instance by Gaspar and Glaeser [19]), cheaper
and more sophisticated telecommunications increase the benefits of clustering in activities
characterised by complex and timely interactions such as business services. In our frame-
work, this implies a growing difference in the strength of localisation economies between
business services (σ ) and manufacturing intermediates ().13 A change in just one of these
two parameters would change average localisation economies, which would have conse-
quences of its own. Thus, in order to isolate formally the effects of a growing difference
in the strength of localisation economies between business services and manufacturing in-
termediates, consider an increase in localisation economies in business services (σ ) and
a corresponding reduction in localisation economies in manufacturing () so as to keep
average localisation economies (γ ≡ ησ + (1 − η)) constant. In the absence of changes
in the urban structure, such changes in localisation economies imply smaller manufactur-
ing cities and a growth in the size of cities hosting headquarters and business services.
However, theses changes in localisation economies may also trigger further changes in the
organisation of production within firms and across cities. Regarding the threshold for the
separation of headquarters and production (ρ̂), there are two effects of opposite sign:
                                              
        dρ̂                (1 − η)σ (1 + 2)2
                      = log                       ρ̂ ≷ 0.                                                      (34)
        dσ d=− η dσ           η(1 + 2σ )2
                    1−η




headquarters and production plant, ρ h . Assume a gradual decline in this cost across all sectors with ρ 1 < ρ 2 <
· · · < ρ m at all times. Then as ρ 1 falls below ρ̂, cities previously specialised in sector 1 undergo a shift from
sectoral to functional specialisation. Some cities are left with only production plants in this sector, whereas their
headquarters concentrate in business centres. The same happens again in sector 2, . . . , m as ρ 2 , . . . , ρ m fall
below ρ̂. Another extension that would also yield a smoother transition is discussed in the concluding section.
12 If we were to introduce the possibility of supplying business services and manufacturing intermediates to
firms in a different city subject to some trade cost, then a greater difficulty in supplying business services at a
distance would also result in higher localisation economies for business services than for manufacturing interme-
diates. Similarly, a greater impact of the congestion costs associated with larger cities on manufacturing than on
business services, say because of their different land intensity, would have analogous implications for the relative
magnitude of localisation economies.
13 An increase in the share of headquarter costs accounted for by business services purchased from external
suppliers, 1 − µ, as compared to directly employed labour would have the same effect (recall that σ ≡ (1 − µ)θ ).
                   G. Duranton, D. Puga / Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2005) 343–370                     365


There is a negative effect on ρ̂ working through relative city sizes: if σ  , LH  LM , so
lumping production with headquarters and business services saves headquarter resources
without much added congestion. On the other hands, there is a positive effect on ρ̂ working
through relative wages: if σ  , wH  wM , so lumping production with headquarters and
business services involves paying production workers much more than they would earn in
separate cities. If business services generate much stronger localisation economies than
manufacturing intermediates this second effect tends to dominate: urban concentrations of
headquarters and business services tend to be very large, and the high wages that workers
must be paid to compensate for high congestion costs drive away production plants and
their suppliers, for which localisation economies are weaker.14


5. Concluding comments

   Our model relates key stylised facts regarding changes in the organisation of firms and
changes in the urban structure. Technological progress in transport and telecommunication
technologies have made it less costly for firms to separate their production facilities from
their headquarter and management facilities. Such a separation is worthwhile only if the
firms can locate their production facilities in environments with greater same sector spe-
cialisation and their headquarters in business centres where business service employment is
abundant. This in turn gives a strong incentive for cities to shift from a main specialisation
along a sectoral dimension to a main specialisation along a functional dimension, lead-
ing to the emergence of separate business centres and manufacturing cities. With greater
benefits from proximity for headquarters and business services than for manufacturing, the
shift from sectoral to functional specialisation also implies that business centres are few
and large whereas manufacturing centres are more numerous and smaller in size.
   Although outside the scope of this paper, three extensions of this model are worth con-
sidering. First, one could enrich the model by assuming different types of business services.
Some business services (e.g., standard business banking or equipment leasing services)
need to be provided on a frequent basis and benefit from a proximity between suppliers
and customers. There are also sophisticated business services (e.g., specialised financial ad-
vice for mergers-and-acquisitions) that are not required as often and for which a proximity
between similar business service firms is more important. Finally, there are routinised busi-
ness services (e.g., call centres) that can be easily be provided from far-away. In this case,
when business services and manufacturing become separated, we would expect day-to-day
services to locate in relatively large cities close to the headquarters of their customers,
more sophisticated services might cluster in a handful of ’world cities’ (such as New York,
London, and Tokyo) concentrating all the highest management functions (Hall [21]), and
the likes of call centres might be farmed-out to low-cost locations.
   Second, one could incorporate a richer geography. For instance, the cost of managing
production remotely might increase in the distance from the headquarter. This could ex-

14 Dekle and Eaton [10] and Adsera [3] find evidence that this kind of process is taking place in Japan and the
US respectively.
366                G. Duranton, D. Puga / Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2005) 343–370


plain the existence of regional business centres that host headquarters whose plants are
predominantly in close-by cities.
   Finally, a particularly interesting (but non-trivial) extension would be to consider hetero-
geneous firms and a small fixed-cost associated with headquarter separation. This would
allow for the co-existence of small firms, with a tendency to co-locate management and
production, and large firms, with a greater tendency to separate their headquarters and
production plants (Aarland et al. [1]). This extension would also allow for a richer urban
landscape and for a smoother equilibrium transition as the costs of managing production
remotely decline.


Acknowledgments

   We are grateful to Fernando Álvarez, Paul Cheshire, Masahisa Fujita, Nancy Gallini,
Ed Glaeser, Claus-Friedrich Laaser, Henry Overman, David Pines, Rüdiger Soltwedel,
Will Strange, participants at CIAR and CEPR workshops and at the RSAI North Amer-
ican meetings, and two referees for helpful comments and discussions. We are especially
indebted to Vernon Henderson for his suggestions and encouragement at various stages of
this project. A first version of this paper was circulated in February 2001, following a visit
by Duranton to the University of Toronto, whose hospitality is gratefully acknowledged.
   Gilles Duranton is also affiliated with the Centre for Economic Policy Research, and the
Centre for Economic Performance at the London School of Economics.
   Diego Puga is also affiliated with the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, the
Centre for Economic Policy Research, and the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Funding from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada, and from
the Connaught Fund of the University of Toronto is gratefully acknowledged.



Appendix A. Proof of Lemma 2

      By Shephard’s Lemma, demand for each variety of business services is
                 ∂C h
                    i,j
        yi0 =             dj
                   ∂qi0
                                     1−η         µ         −(θ+1)/θ                        
                           Qm+h            wih        qi0
           = η(1 − µ)       i
                                                                        xi,i + ρ       xi,j dj .   (A.1)
                               Hih         Q0i        Q0i
                                                                               j =i

It follows from (A.1) that the elasticity of demand for each business service with respect
to a firm’s own price is −(θ + 1)/θ , so that the profit-maximising price for each business
service is a constant relative markup over marginal cost:

        qi0 = (θ + 1)β 0 wi0 .                                                                     (A.2)
                    G. Duranton, D. Puga / Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2005) 343–370      367


Free entry and exit in business services drives maximised profits to zero. From the zero
profit condition, the only level of output in services consistent with zero profits is
           α0
      yi0 =    .                                                                  (A.3)
          β 0θ
Demand for labour by business service suppliers can be obtained by application of Shep-
hard’s Lemma to (9) and integration over varieties as
                  ∂Ci0                               θ +1
      li0 = si0          = si0 α 0 + β 0 yi0 = si0 α 0      ,                              (A.4)
                  ∂wi0                                   θ
where (A.3) has been substituted in to yield the final expression. By choice of units of
business service output, we can set β 0 = (θ/α 0 ) (θ + 1)−(θ+1) . Using (A.4) and (A.2), the
                                                  θ

price indices of (6) simplify into
              −1/θ −θ  0 −θ 0
       Q0i = si0 qi0          = li     wi .                                            (A.5)


Appendix B. Proof of Lemma 7

   Consider first a city hosting only production plants for multi-location firms. From (12),
      m+h                        
     lM   = Lm+hM     1 − τ Lm+h
                              M    .                                                  (B.6)
The developer’s programme of (27), for the case of a city hosting only production plants
for multi-location firms in sector h, can thus be expressed as
               m+h        m+h                         m+h 1+
      max ΠM        , ΠM       = Qm+h Lm+h M (1 − τ LM )        − Lm+h
                                                                   M ē.           (B.7)
      {Lm+h
        M }

The first order condition for (B.7) implies that workers consumption expenditure equals
the value of their social marginal product
                                                       
      ē = (1 + )Qm+h Lm+hM     1 − τ Lm+h
                                        M        1 − 2τ Lm+h
                                                         M    .                   (B.8)
Free entry of land developers exhausts their profits in equilibrium. Substituting (B.8) into
                   m+h
(B.7) and using ΠM      = 0 yields equilibrium population for any city hosting only produc-
tion plants as
                            
      LM = Lm+h     =             .                                                   (B.9)
               M
                       τ (1 + 2)
Turning to a city hosting only headquarters for multi-location firms, from (12) and (26),
             1+σ −µ h               
       0
      lH =              LH 1 − τ LhH ,                                               (B.10)
               1+σ
               µ                
       h
      lH =         Lh 1 − τ LhH .                                                    (B.11)
             1+σ H
By symmetry, H h = H for all sectors. Substituting (B.10) into (27), the programme for the
developer of a city hosting only headquarters for multi-location firms is
                                (1 + θ )1+σ −µ (1 − µ)σ               1+σ
      max ΠH ,           ΠH =                          H LH (1 − τ LH )     − LH ē.      (B.12)
      {LH }                           (1 + σ )1+σ
368                    G. Duranton, D. Puga / Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2005) 343–370


The first order condition for (B.12) together with ΠH = 0 yields equilibrium population
for any city hosting only headquarters as
                   σ
      LH =                .                                                     (B.13)
              τ (1 + 2σ )
Finally, consider a city hosting only integrated firms. From (4), and Lemmas 2 and 1, the
equilibrium unit production cost for integrated firms in sector h is
             ηµ  0 η(1−µ)  m+h 1−η  0 −ησ  m+h −(1−η)
      cIh = wIh      wI         wI          lI      lI            .               (B.14)
By Shephard’s Lemma,
                      1 − µ h h η(1 − µ) m+h m+h
      wI0 lI0 =            w I lI =     w I lI .                                             (B.15)
                        µ           1−η
From (26), Lemma 5, and (B.15),
       wIh                       wIm+h         (1 − η)lI0
           = 1 + θ,                      =                    .                              (B.16)
       wI0                        wI0        η(1 − µ)lIm+h
Substituting (B.16) into (B.14) yields
                                                1−η
                                      1−η                0 −η(1+σ )  m+h −(1−η)(1+)
      cIh = wI0 lI0 (1 + θ )ηµ                           lI            lI                .   (B.17)
                                     η(1 − µ)
Zero profits for final firms imply that, if in equilibrium any city has only integrated firms
in sector h, cIh = P h . We can thus use this and (B.17) to solve for wI0 lI0 as a function of lI0 ,
lIm+h , P h , and parameters. From (B.15), we obtain
                                                  1
      wI0 lI0 + wIh lIh + wIm+h lIm+h =               w0 l 0
                                              η(1 − µ) I I
                                                         η(1+σ )        (1−η)(1+)
                                             P h (l 0 ) (l m+h )
                                           = η I 1−η I                    .                  (B.18)
                                            η (1 − η) (1 + θ )ηµ (1 − µ)η
And by (12) and (26), lI0 + lIh + lIm+h = ((1 + σ )/(1 + σ − µ))lI0 + lIm+h = LhI (1 − τ LhI ),
where LhI denotes total population in this city. Hence, the developer’s programme of (27)
for the case of a city hosting only integrated firms can be expressed as
                                              η(1+σ )         (1−η)(1+)
                                     P h (lI0 )     (lIm+h )
        max ΠIh ,           ΠIh =                                 − LhI ē,                  (B.19)
      {lI0 ,lIm+h }                 η (1 − η) (1 + θ )ηµ (1 − µ)η
                                     η          1−η

subject to
        1+σ                             
              lI0 + lIm+h = LhI 1 − τ LhI .                                                  (B.20)
       1+σ −µ
The first order conditions for (B.19) together with (B.19), (B.20), and ΠIh = 0 yield equi-
librium population for any city hosting only headquarters as
                       γ
      LI = LhI =              ,                                                     (B.21)
                  τ (1 + 2γ )
                    G. Duranton, D. Puga / Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2005) 343–370                         369


and its split between occupations as
                η(1 + σ − µ)
           lI0 =              LI (1 − τ LI ),                                                              (B.22)
                    1+γ
                 ηµ
          lIh =       LI (1 − τ LI ),                                                                      (B.23)
                1+γ
                (1 − η)(1 + )
       lIm+h =                 LI (1 − τ LI ).                                                             (B.24)
                    1+γ


References

 [1] K. Aarland, J.C. Davis, J. Henderson, Y. Ono, Spatial organization of firms: The decision to split production
     and administration, Processed, Brown University, 2003.
 [2] H.M. Abdel-Rahman, M. Fujita, Product variety, Marshallian externalities, and city sizes, Journal of Re-
     gional Science 30 (2) (1990) 165–183.
 [3] A. Adserà, Sectoral spillovers and the price of land: a cost analysis, Regional Science and Urban Eco-
     nomics 30 (5) (2000) 565–585.
 [4] P. Antràs, Firms, contracts, and trade structure, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (4) (2003) 1374–1418.
 [5] R.J. Arnott, J.E. Stiglitz, Aggregate land rents, expenditure on public goods, and optimal city size, Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 93 (4) (1979) 471–500.
 [6] F.-J. Bade, C.-F. Laaser, R. Soltwedel, Urban specialization in the internet age—empirical findings for Ger-
     many, Processed, Kiel Institute for World Economics, 2003.
 [7] A.D. Chandler, The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business, Belknap, Cambridge,
     MA, 1977.
 [8] J.C. Davis, Headquarters, services and mobility in the urban system, Unpublished PhD dissertation, Brown
     University, 2001.
 [9] J.C. Davis, J. Henderson, The agglomeration of headquarters, Processed, Brown University, 2004.
[10] R. Dekle, J. Eaton, Agglomeration and land rents: Evidence from the prefectures, Journal of Urban Eco-
     nomics 46 (2) (1999) 200–214.
[11] A.K. Dixit, J.E. Stiglitz, Monopolistic competition and optimum product diversity, American Economic
     Review 67 (3) (1977) 297–308.
[12] G. Duranton, D. Puga, Nursery cities: Urban diversity, process innovation, and the life cycle of products,
     American Economic Review 91 (5) (2001) 1454–1477.
[13] G. Duranton, D. Puga, Micro-foundations of urban agglomeration economies, in: V. Henderson, J.-F. Thisse
     (Eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, vol. 4, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 2004, pp. 2063–
     2117.
[14] F. Flatters, J. Henderson, P. Mieszkowski, Public goods, efficiency, and regional fiscal equalization, Journal
     of Public Economics 3 (2) (1974) 99–112.
[15] M. Fujita, A monopolistic competition model of spatial agglomeration: A differentiated product approach,
     Regional Science and Urban Economics 18 (1) (1988) 87–124.
[16] M. Fujita, Urban Economic Theory: Land Use and City Size, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1989.
[17] M. Fujita, R. Ishii, Global location behavior and organizational dynamics of Japanese electronics firms and
     their impact on regional economies, in: A.D.C.P. Hagström Jr., Ö. Sölvell (Eds.), The Dynamic Firm: The
     Role of Technology, Strategy, Organization and Regions, Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford, 1998, pp. 343–383.
[18] M. Fujita, T. Tabuchi, Regional growth in postwar Japan, Regional Science and Urban Economics 27 (6)
     (1997) 643–670.
[19] J. Gaspar, E.L. Glaeser, Information technology and the future of cities, Journal of Urban Economics 43 (1)
     (1998) 136–156.
[20] G.M. Grossman, E. Helpman, Integration versus outsourcing in industry equilibrium, Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 117 (1) (2002) 85–120.
[21] P.G. Hall, The World Cities, Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London, 1984.
370                G. Duranton, D. Puga / Journal of Urban Economics 57 (2005) 343–370


[22] E. Helpman, A simple theory of international trade with multinational corporations, Journal of Political
     Economy 92 (3) (1984) 451–471.
[23] R.W. Helsley, W.C. Strange, Limited developers, Canadian Journal of Economics 30 (2) (1997) 329–348.
[24] J. Henderson, The sizes and types of cities, American Economic Review 64 (4) (1974) 640–656.
[25] J. Henderson, Urban Development: Theory, Fact and Illusion, Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford, 1988.
[26] J. Henderson, R. Becker, Political economy of city sizes and formation, Journal of Urban Economics 48 (3)
     (2000) 453–484.
[27] J. Henderson, A. Mitra, The new urban landscape: Developers and edge cities, Regional Science and Urban
     Economics 26 (6) (1996) 613–643.
[28] C.I. Jones, The upcoming slowdown in US economic growth, Working paper 6284, NBER, 1997.
[29] S. Kim, Expansion of markets and the geographic distribution of economic activities: The trends in US
     regional manufacturing structure, 1860–1987, Quarterly Journal of Economics 110 (4) (1995) 881–908.
[30] S. Kim, The rise of multiunit firms in US manufacturing, Explorations in Economic History 36 (4) (1999)
     360–386.
[31] J. Kolko, Can I get some service here? Information technologies, service industries and the future of cities,
     Processed, Harvard University, 1999.
[32] E.E. Leamer, M. Storper, The economic geography of the Internet age, Journal of International Business
     Studies 32 (4) (2001) 641–665.
[33] D. Marin, T. Verdier, Power inside the firm and the market: A general equilibrium approach, Discussion
     paper 3526, Centre for Economic Policy Research, 2002.
[34] J.R. Markusen, Multinationals, multi-plant economies, and the gains from trade, Journal of International
     Economics 16 (3–4) (1984) 205–226.
[35] J.R. Markusen, Trade in producer services and in other specialized intermediate inputs, American Economic
     Review 79 (1) (1989) 88–95.
[36] J.R. Markusen, The boundaries of multinational enterprises and the theory of international trade, Journal of
     Economic Perspectives 9 (2) (1995) 169–189.
[37] Y. Ono, Outsourcing business services and the role of central administrative offices, Journal of Urban Eco-
     nomics 53 (3) (2003) 377–395.
[38] M. Ota, M. Fujita, Communication technologies and spatial organization of multi-unit firms in metropolitan
     areas, Regional Science and Urban Economics 23 (6) (1993) 695–729.
[39] Y.Y. Papageorgiou, D. Pines, Externalities, indivisibility, nonreplicability, and agglomeration, Journal of
     Urban Economics 48 (3) (2000) 509–535.
[40] M.K. Perry, Vertical integration: Determinants and effects, in: R. Schmalensee, R.D. Willig (Eds.), Hand-
     book of Industrial Organization, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1989, pp. 183–255.
[41] D. Puga, D. Trefler, Knowledge creation and control in organizations, Working paper 9121, NBER, 2002.
[42] J. Serck-Hanssen, The optimal number of factories in a spatial market, in: H.C. Bos (Ed.), Towards Balanced
     International Growth, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1969, pp. 269–282.
[43] L. Shilton, C. Stanley, Spatial patterns of headquarters, Journal of Real Estate Research 17 (3) (1999) 341–
     364.
[44] D.A. Starrett, Principles of optimal location in a large homogeneous area, Journal of Economic Theory 9 (4)
     (1974) 418–448.
[45] J.E. Stiglitz, The theory of local public goods, in: M.S. Feldstein, R.P. Inman (Eds.), The Economics of
     Public Services, MacMillan & Co., London, 1977, pp. 274–333.
[46] V. Strauss-Khan, X. Vives, Why and where do headquarters move? Processed, INSEAD, 2004.
[47] W.S. Vickrey, The city as a firm, in: M.S. Feldstein, R.P. Inman (Eds.), The Economics of Public Services,
     MacMillan & Co., London, 1977, pp. 334–343.
[48] J. Yates, Control Through Communication: The Rise of System in American Management, Johns Hopkins
     Univ. Press, Baltimore, MD, 1989.
[49] J. Yates, Investing in information: Supply and demand forces in the use of information in American firms,
     1850–1929, in: P. Temin (Ed.), Inside the Business Enterprise: Historical Perspectives on the Use of Infor-
     mation, Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 1991, pp. 117–154.
