[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: book/T08-fujita-krugman-venables-1999-the-spatial-economy-cities-regions-and-international-trade-no-doi.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Title:           The Spatial Economy: Cities, Regions, and International Trade
Subject:         
Author:          Masahisa Fujita, Paul Krugman and Anthony J. Venables
Creator:         Acrobat 5.0 Paper Capture Plug-in for Windows
Producer:        Acrobat PDFWriter 3.02 for Windows
CreationDate:    Fri Apr 14 13:02:14 2006 WIB
ModDate:         Sat May 12 00:12:45 2007 WIB
Custom Metadata: no
Metadata Stream: yes
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            AcroForm
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           380
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       150 x 226.5 pts
Page rot:        0
File size:       17074141 bytes
Optimized:       no
PDF version:     1.6
[Extracted Text]
The Spatial Economy
Cities, Regions, and
International Trade




Masahisa Fujita,
Paul Krugman,
Anthony J. Venables




The MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England
0 1999 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any electronic
or mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or information storage and
retrieval) without permission in writing from the publisher.

This book was set in Palatino by Achorn Graphic Services, Inc.

Printed and bound in the United States of America.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Fujita, Masahisa.
     The spatial economy : cities, regions, and international trade / M. Fujita,
  P. Krugman, A.J. Venables.
        p. cm.
     Includes bibliographical references and index.
     ISBN 0-262-06204-6 (hc. : alk. paper)
     1. Economic geography. 2. Space in economics. 3. Urban economics.
  4. Regional economics. S. International trade. I. Krugman, Paul R.
  11. Venables, Anthony. 111. Title.
  HF1025.F973 1999
  330.9-dc21                                                          99-10744
                                                                          CIP
                                   Contents




    Preface   xi

1 Introduction    1
  1.1 The Rediscovery of Geography        1
  1.2 Linkages and Circular Causation 4
  1.3 Modeling Tricks: Dixit-Stiglitz, Icebergs, Evolution, and the
      Computer 6
  1.4 Two Useful Questions 9
  1.5 Plan of the Book 10

I   Some Intellectual Background      13

2   Antecedents I: Urban Economics 15
    2.1 The von Thiinen Model 15
    2.2 Explaining Cities: External Economies 18
    2.3 Urban Systems 19
    2.4 Multiple Subcenters 22
    2.5 Uses and Limits of Traditional Urban Economics     23
    Notes 24

3   Antecedents 11: Regional Science 25
    3.1 Central-Place Theory 26
    3.2 Base-Multiplier Analysis 27
    3.3 Market Potential Analysis 32
    3.4 Limitations of Regional Science 33
    Appendix: A Brief Introduction to Bifurcations   34
    Notes 41
vi                                                           Contents


I1 Labor Mobility and Regional Development            43

4    The Dixit-Stiglitz Model of Monopolistic Competition and Its
     Spatial Implications 45
     4.1 Consumer Behavior 46
     4.2 Multiple Locations and Transport Costs 49
     4.3 Producer Behavior 50
     4.4 Some Normalizations 54
     4.5 The Price Index Effect and the Home Market Effect 55
     4.6 The "No-Black-Hole" Condition 58
     Notes 59

5    Core and Periphery 61
     5.1 Assumptions 61
     5.2 Instantaneous Equilibrium 63
     5.3 The Core-Periphery Model: Statement and Numerical
         Examples 65
     5.4 When Is a Core-Periphery Pattern Sustainable? 69
     5.5 When is the Symmetric Equilibrium Broken? 71
     5.6 Implications and Conclusions 75
     Appendix: Symmetry Breaking 76
     Notes 77

6    Many Regions and Continuous Space 79
     6.1 The Three-Region Case 79
     6.2 The Racetrack Economy 82
     6.3 The Turing Approach 85
     6.4 The Growth Rate of a Fluctuation 88
     6.5 Determining the Preferred Frequency: The Large
         Economy 91
     6.6 From Local to Global 94
     6.7 Conclusions 94
     Appendix: Simulation Parameters 95
     Notes 95

7    Agricultural Transport Costs 97
     7.1 Trade Costs: The Realities 97
     7.2 Trade Costs: The Model 99
     7.3 Core-Periphery or Symmetry? 100
     7.4 Differentiated Agricultural Products   105
Contents                                                                vii



    7.5 Conclusions 110
    Appendix 7.1: Symmetry Breaking 111
    Appendix 7.2: Simulation Parameters 114
    Notes 115

I11 The Urban System       117

8   Spatial Models of Urban Systems: A Heuristic
    Introduction    119
    8.1 Location Decisions and the Distribution of Demand         120
    8.2 Sustaining and Locking In Urban Location 121
    8.3 Population Growth and City Formation 126
    8.4 Urban Hierarchies 128
    8.5 Ports and Transportation Hubs 129
    8.6 Conclusions 131
    Notes 132

9   The Monocentric Economy 133
    9.1 TheModel      134
    9.2 The von Thiinen Economy 136
    9.3 The Market Potential Function 140
    9.4 The Potential Function and the Sustainability of a City     143
    Appendix 9.1: On the Definition of the Market Potential
    Function 148
    Appendix 9.2: The Limit Market Potential Function 149
    Notes 149

10 The Emergence of New Cities 151
   10.1 Adjustment Dynamics and the Stability of the Spatial
        System 152
   10.2 From One City to Three 154
   10.3 Emergence of New Cities in the Long Run 160
   10.4 Conclusions 167
   Appendix 10.1: Bifurcation with Costly Transport of Agricultural
   Goods 168
   Appendix 10.2: Supplementary Calculations for
   Appendix 10.1 171
   Appendix 10.3: Adjustment Dynamics of a General Three-City
   Case 175
   Notes 179
 ...
Vlll                                                       Contents


11 Evolution of a Hierarchical Urban System 181
   11.1 The Formation of an Urban Hierarchy in Nineteenth-
        Century America 182
   11.2 The Model 184
   11.3 The Monocentric System 186
   11.4 Self-Organization Toward a Hierarchical System 191
   11.5 Conclusions 203
   Appendix 11.1: The Equilibrium of the Agricultural
   Market 205
   Appendix 11.2: The Equilibrium Conditions of the Monocentric
   Economy 206
   Appendix 11.3: The Proof that (11.16) Implies (11.17) 207
   Notes 212

12 An Empirical Digression: The Sizes of Cities 215
   12.1 The Size Distribution of Cities 215
   12.2 Do Urban Theories Predict the Rank-Size Rule? 217
   12.3 Can Random Growth Explain the Rank-Size Rule? 219
   12.4 Conclusions 225
   Note 225

13 Ports, Transportation Hubs, and City Location 227
   13.1 The Monocentric Economy 228
   13.2 The Impact of a Transportation Hub on the Market
        Potential Function 231
   13.3 Patterns of Spatial Evolution 233
   13.4 Conclusions 235
   Notes 236

IV International Trade   237

14 International Specialization 239
   14.1 A Model with Intermediate Goods 241
   14.2 The Structure of Equilibria 245
   14.3 Agglomeration and National Inequalities   251
   14.4 Decreasing Returns in Agriculture 256
   14.5 Conclusions 259
   Appendix 14.1: Symmetry Breaking 260
   Appendix 14.2: Simulation Parameters 261
   Notes 261
Contents                                                         ix


15 Economic Development and the Spread of Industry 263
   15.1 Growth and Sustainable Wage Differentials 264
   15.2 Many Industries and Many Countries 270
   15.3 Conclusions 277
   Appendix 15.1: The Multicountry, Multi-Industry Model 278
   Appendix 15.2: Simulation Parameters 280
   Notes 281

16 Industrial Clustering 283
   16.1 Industrial Clusters: The Evidence 284
   16.2 Industrial Clusters: The Model 285
   16.3 Concentration or Dispersion? 287
   16.4 Adjustment and Real Income 291
   16.5 Multiple Factors: Industrial Clustering in a f-xkscher-0 in
        World 293
   16.6 Multiple Industries and Sustainable Cross-Country
        Differences 298
   16.7 Conclusions 303
   Appendix 16.1: Symmetry Breaking 304
   Appendix 16.2: Adjustment and Real Income 305
   Appendix 16.3: The Production Possibility Frontier 306
   Appendix 16.4: Multiple Industries 306
   Appendix 16.5: Simulation Parameters 307
   Notes 307

17 A Seamless World 309
   17.1 The Model 310
   17.2 The Frequency of Agglomeration 313
   17.3 From Local to Global 317
   17.4 Punctuated Equilibrium 319
   17.5 Multiple Industries 321
   17.6 Center and Periphery 322
   17.7 Conclusions 325
   Appendix 17.1: Symmetry Breaking 325
   Appendix 17.2: Simulation Parameters 326
   Notes 327

18 External Trade and Internal Geography 329
   18.1 Urban Concentration in an Open Economy       331
   18.2 The Effects of Trade Liberalization 332
X                                                           Contents


    18.3 Industrial Clustering and External Trade 335
    18.4 Industrial Structure and Urban Concentration 338
    18.5 Conclusions 340
    Appendix 18.1: Symmetry Breaking 341
    Appendix 18.2: Simulation Parameters 343
    Notes 343

19 The Way Forward      345
   19.1 The Theoretical Menu   346
    19.2 Empirical Work 347
    19.3 Quantification   347
    19.4 Welfare Implications 348
    19.5 Where We Stand 349

    References 351
    Index 357
                                       Preface




Mainstream economics has traditionally paid remarkably little atten-
tion to the location of economic activity-to the choices firms and
households make about where to produce and consume, and about
how these choices interact. The most recent edition of Mark Blaug’s
Economic Theory in Retrospect (1997) speaks of a ”curious disdain of
location theory on the part of mainstream economics,” and asserts that
”this neglect largely continues to this day.”
   But these remarks are, it turns out, a bit out of date. Since about 1990
there has been a renaissance-or perhaps simply a naissance, because
the field has always been neglected-of theoretical and empirical work
on the spatial aspects of the economy. Relying on new theoretical tools,
this ’hew economic geography” has quickly emerged as one of the
most exciting areas of contemporary economics.
   Experience shows that a few years into such a new movement, it is
often helpful if someone provides a synthesis-typically a book that
shows how many seemingly disparate models can be viewed as varia-
tions on a few main themes, that develops a common ”grammar” for
discussing a range of issues. Such books as Helpman and Krugman
1985, on imperfect competition and international trade, or Gross-
man and Helpman 1991, on endogenous growth, helped give shape
and direction to the new fields they surveyed. We believe that the
time has come for a similar effort on the theory of economic geog-
raphy. This book shows, in particular, how a common approach-one
that emphasizes the three-way interaction among increasing returns,
transportation costs, and the movement of productive factors-can
be applied to a wide variety of issues in regional, urban, and inter-
national economics.
   Not everyone will want or need to read all of the book. Here is a
brief guide to its contents. Part I is essentially background material: a
xii                                                              Preface


review of the motivations for doing this kind of economic theory, and
of some themes in earlier work that bear directly on our approach. The
base-multiplier model of chapter 3 and the discussion of bifurcations
in that chapter’s appendix will probably prove useful as warm-up exer-
cises for subsequent discussions. Part I1 then develops the basic ap-
proach, applying it to ”regional” models, by which we mean models
in which some factors of production are free to move among locations.
Even for those whose principal interest is in either urban or interna-
tional economics, chapters 4 and 5 are essential reading: The former
sets out the market structure we use throughout the book; the latter,
in the course of developing a basic core-periphery model, also develops
a number of concepts and algebraic results that recur repeatedly. Chap-
ters 6 and 7 are more optional (although each introduces concepts that
are used in part IV; in particular, chapter 6 is a prerequisite for the
similar discussion in chapter 17).
   With these preliminaries under his or her belt, the reader has more
options. The order of parts I11 and IV is arbitrary: You can proceed
from regional directly to international economics rather than via urban
economics, if you like. Within part 111, the heuristic introduction in
chapter 8 provides a road map to the material; from then on the devel-
opment is sequential, except for the empirically motivated digression
in chapter 12. In part IV, chapter 14 is essential background for the
remaining chapters, but thereafter they can be taken on a stand-alone
basis.
   Some of this book is based on earlier publications by the authors, in
some cases in collaboration with others. We would like to give particu-
lar mention to Tomoya Mori’s role as a coauthor of the original papers
on which much of chapters 10, 11, and 13 is based; to Diego Puga’s
role as coauthor of the basis paper for chapter 15; and to Raul Livas-
Elizondo’s corresponding role vis-a-vis chapter 18.
   The book also benefited immensely from comments from many peo-
ple. Portions of the manuscript have been used as the basis of courses
at both the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the London
School of Economics, and students in these courses provided important
input. Among those who have read draft versions of the manuscript
and provided valuable suggestions are Jacques Thisse at the Center for
Operations Research and Econometrics (CORE), J. Vernon Henderson
at Brown University, Yannis Ioannides at Tufts University, Gianmarco
Ottaviano at the University of Bologna, Martin Wagner at the Vienna
Preface                                                                ...
                                                                     Xlll




University of Technology, and Hiroyuki Koide at Nagoya Economics
University.
  Thanks also go to Hiroyuki Koide and Tomoya Mori for their excel-
lent work in editing parts of this book and, for research support, to the
U.K. Economic and Social Research Council-funded Centre for Eco-
nomic Performance at the London School of Economics and to the Brit-
ish Taiwan Cultural Institute.
This page intentionally left blank
1                                     Introduction




1.1 The Rediscovery of Geography

Around the corner from the English National Opera lies St. Martin’s
Court, a short street occupied mainly by sellers of secondhand books
and prints. It is a reasonable location for such shops, but there are no
doubt other locations that would serve as well. Why, then, have the
shops’ owners chosen to be there? To be near each other. No doubt
there is some interesting story about how that cluster of book and print
shops originally became established, but what sustains it now is a sort
of circular logic: Potential customers come to St. Martin’s Court be-
cause they expect to find a range of shops to browse in, and shops
locate there because they know they will have access to a large pool
of potential customers.
   The phenomenon that St. Martin’s Court illustrates in microcosm
pervades every economy. Agglomeration- the clustering of economic
activity, created and sustained by some sort of circular logic-occurs
at many levels, from the local shopping districts that serve surrounding
residential areas within cities to specialized economic regions like Sili-
con Valley (or the City of London) that serve the world market as a
whole. The distribition of population and activity across the landscape
is radically uneven; in advanced countries the majority of the popula-
tion lives in large metropolitan areas, and these metropolises are them-
selves clustered into regions like the Boston-Washington corridor. Yet
although agglomeration is clearly a powerful force, it is not all-power-
ful: London is big, but most Britons live elsewhere, in a system of cities
with widely varying sizes and roles.
   It should not, in other words, be hard to convince economists that
economic geography-the study of where economic activity takes
place and why-is both an interesting and an important subject. Yet
2                                                                Chapter 1


until a few years ago it was a subject mainstream economics largely
neglected. Even now, introductory textbooks seem to describe a curi-
ously disembodied economy, without cities or regions. (Most such
texts, indeed, make literally no mention at all of such questions as the
reasons for urbanization or the role of location in economic decisions).
   In the last few years, however, research on economic geography-
that is, on where economic activity occurs and why-has increased
dramatically. Real-world concerns have, to some extent, driven this
surge of interest: The field has been given a big boost in particular by
plans to unify the European market and the attempt to understand
how this deeper integration will work by comparing international eco-
nomics within Europe with interregional economics within the United
States. But economic geography has always been important; if the eco-
nomics profession has notably neglected it, this is not because econo-
mists have been uninterested in the subject, but because they have
regarded it as intractable. Their new willingness to work on economic
geography comes from their sense that new tools-in particular, mod-
eling tricks that have been developed to analyze industrial organiza-
tion, international trade, and economic growth-have removed crucial
technical barriers and transformed a once inhospitable field into fertile
ground for theorists.
   The basic problem with doing theoretical work in economic geogra-
phy has always been that any sensible story about regional and urban
development hinges crucially on the role of increasing returns. Sup-
pose that we really lived in the constant-returns world that much eco-
nomic theory still assumes. Then it would be hard to understand why
the economy is not characterized by ”backyard capitalism,” in which
each household or small group produces most items for itself. There
would, admittedly, be some unevenness in population density and
some trade among locations because of the variation in the natural en-
vironment: Land differs in fertility, and differences in soil, climate, and
resources mean that no one locality would produce all goods even un-
der constant returns. Nonetheless, the dramatic spatial unevenness of
the real economy-the disparities between densely populated manu-
facturing belts and thinly populated farm belts, between congested
cities and desolate rural areas; the spectacular concentration of particu-
lar industries in Silicon Valleys and Hollywoods-is surely the result
not of inherent differences among locations but of some set of cumula-
tive processes, necessarily involving some form of increasing returns,
whereby geographic concentration can be self-reinforcing.
Introduction                                                            3


    Unfortunately, increasing returns have always posed difficulties for
 economic theorists. Except under very special circumstances they lead
 to a breakdown of perfect competition; even if this problem can some-
 how be finessed, they pose problems for the existence and uniqueness
 of equilibria. For the theorist determined to make some headway in
 understanding the location of economic activity, these difficulties have
 not been insurmountable. For example, one can, like much of urban
 economics, simply take the existence of cities (or central business dis-
 tricts within cities) as a given and trace out the consequences for land
 rents and land use; this is the basis of the famous von Thunen model,
 which has given rise to a rich and productive literature. Or one can,
 like urban systems theorists (above all Henderson (1974, 1980, 1988)),
represent increasing returns in a somewhat black-box way as localized
production externalities; this approach sidesteps some important ques-
tions but opens the door to a powerfully insightful analysis of others.
Still, until a few years ago these efforts remained peripheral to the main
body of economic theory.
    In the last few years, however, a ”new economic geography” has
emerged, the fourth wave of the increasing-returns revolution in eco-
nomics. The revolution began in the 1970s in the field of industrial
organization, when theorists began for the first time to develop trac-
table models of competition in the presence of increasing returns; in
particular, Dixit and Stiglitz (1977)developed a formalization of Cham-
berlin’s concept of monopolistic competition that, though admittedly
a very special case, has turned into the workhorse of theoretical model-
ing in a number of fields. Beginning at the end of the 1970s,a number of
theorists applied the analytical tools of the new industrial organization
theory to international trade; a few years later the same tools were
applied to technological change and economic growth. In each case it
was, of course, necessary to do much more than mechanically apply
the Dixit-Stiglitz model to the subject at hand: New concepts needed
to be developed, and at first seemingly inconsistent models and ap-
proaches proliferated, in which each author appeared to be inventing
his or her own private language and notation. In time, however, it be-
came clear in each case that a core set of useful insights had emerged;
indeed, in retrospect it is remarkable how tightly integrated, how clas-
sical in feel, both the ”new trade” and ”new growth” theory have
turned out to be.
   Our sense is that the state of the ”new economic geography” is cur-
rently similar to that of the new trade theory circa 1984, or the new
4                                                                  Chapter 1


growth theory circa 1990. That is, an exuberant and initially exhilarat-
ing growth of theory has reached the point at which it has become
difficult to see the forest for the trees; and yet there is, if one looks for
it, a strong element of commonality among many if not all of the analy-
ses. The integration of new trade and new growth theory was, we be-
lieve, powerfully aided by the appearance of judiciously timed
monographs that endeavored to synthesize each field into a coherent
whole: Helpman and Krugman’s Market Structure and Foreign Trade
(1985)and Grossman and Helpman’s fnnovation and Growth in the World
Economy (1991). This book is, of course, an effort to do the same with
the new economic geography.
    In the remainder of this chapter, we describe what we regard as the
unifying themes, methods, and questions of this new field and set out
the plan of the book.

1.2 Linkages and Circular Causation

We would argue that the defining issue of economic geography is the
need to explain concentrations of population and of economic activity:
the distinction between manufacturing belt and farm belt, the existence
of cities, the role of industry clusters. Broadly speaking, all these con-
centrations form and survive because of some form of agglomeration
economies, in which spatial concentration itself creates the favorable
economic environment that supports further or continued concentra-
tion. And for some purposes, as in the urban systems literature de-
scribed in chapter 2, it may be enough simply to posit the existence of
such agglomeration economies. But the main thrust of the new geogra-
phy literature has been to get inside that particular black box and de-
rive the self-reinforcing character of spatial concentration from more
fundamental considerations. The point is not just that positing agglom-
eration economies seems a bit like assuming one’s conclusion; as a sar-
castic physicist remarked after hearing one presentation on increasing
returns, ”So you’re telling us that agglomerations form because of ag-
glomeration economies.” The larger point is that by modeling the
sources of increasing returns to spatial concentration, we can learn
something about how and when these returns may change, and then
explore how the economy’s behavior changes with them.
   How should the returns to spatial concentration be modeled? More
than a century ago Alfred Marshal1 suggested a threefold classification
(1920, p. 271). In modern terminology, he argued that industrial dis-
Introduction                                                             5


tricts arise because of knowledge spillovers (”the mysteries of the trade
become no mysteries; but are as it were in the air”), the advantages
of thick markets for specialized skills, and the backward and forward
linkages associated with large local markets. Although all three of Mar-
shall’s forces are clearly operating in the real world, the new geography
models have generally downplayed the first two, essentially because
they remain hard to model in any explicit way. Instead, they have fo-
cused on the role of linkages.
   The linkage story is easy to tell if one is willing to be a bit vague
about the details. Producers, so the story goes, want to choose locations
that have good access to large markets and to supplies of goods that
they or their workers require. However, a place that for whatever rea-
son already has a concentration of producers tends to offer a large mar-
ket (because of the demand the producers and their workers generate)
and a good supply of inputs and consumer goods (made by the produc-
ers already there). These two advantages correspond precisely to the
backward linkages and forward linkages of development theory. Be-
cause of these linkages, a spatial concentration of production, once es-
tablished, may tend to persist, and a small difference in the initial
economic size of two otherwise equivalent locations may grow over
time.
   Discussions of linkage-based spatial concentration that embody
more or less this story have been familiar to regional scientists for many
years. In chapter 3, we describe in particular two such stories: the dy-
namic extension of the base-multiplier approach largely identified with
Pred (1966) and the widely used concept of market potential associated
with such authors as Harris (1954). And provided that one is prepared
to be strategically sloppy about details, it is possible to jump straight
from such stories into heuristic models that are quite useful both for
quick and dirty discussions of real-world issues and as guides to the
results of more careful modeling. Such loose-jointed modeling is, we
believe, underappreciated in economics; we try to give it its due.
   Nonetheless, traditional discussions of linkages and economic geog-
raphy do not address certain questions that nevertheless become cru-
cial once one tries to get beyond the simplest stories. Most important
of these is the nature of competition. Linkage stories work only if there
are increasing returns to production at the level of the individual firm;
otherwise, the firm would not concentrate production where the mar-
ket is largest, but rather establish a separate facility to serve each mar-
ket. But if there are increasing returns, competition must be imperfect;
6                                                                Chapter 1


how do firms compete and set prices? Models like the base-multiplier
story are also sloppy about budget constraints: It is unclear where all the
money comes from or where it goes. And in any story in which transpor-
tation costs play a crucial role-as they must in linkage stories about
location, because otherwise why does location ma tter?-one must worry
about how the resources used in transportation fit into the picture.
   The key enabling technology for the new economic geography has
been the development of a basic approach that deals in a consistent, if
more than a bit artificial, way with these problems, together with an
angle of approach that allows theorists to cut through what might at
first sight seem to be intractably complex problems of analysis.

1.3 Modeling Tricks: Dixit-Stiglitz, Icebergs, Evolution, and the
Computer

We believe that economists’ historical unwillingness to address issues
of economic geography was mainly due to the sense that these issues
were technically intractable. As a result, we are only mildly apologetic
about the fact that our analysis depends crucially on what might per-
haps best be called modeling tricks: assumptions that reflect not so
much a realistic view of how the world works as a judgment about
what will make the analysis of geographic issues manageable without
doing too much damage to the relevance of that analysis.
   The first and biggest trick of our analysis is something we have in
common with the new trade and new growth literature: a heavy depen-
dence on the Dixit-Stiglitz model of monopolistic competition. To
someone unfamiliar with the exigencies of economic modeling, the
popularity of the Dixit-Stiglitz model might seem baffling. The model
not only assumes that many goods, though constituting distinct prod-
ucts from the point of view of consumers, enter perfectly symmetrically
into demand; it also assumes that the individual utility function takes
a particular and fairly unlikely form. Yet the Dixit-Stiglitz model has
been the basis of a huge body of economic theory in international trade,
economic growth, and now economic geography. Although we step
away from that model on occasion, especially in our more heuristic
discussions, Dixit-Stiglitz assumptions pervade this book.
  We are aware that this lends the analysis a certain air of unreality,
that this book sometimes looks as if it should be entitled C a m s You
Can Play with CES Functions. Nonetheless, we regard the advantages
of the Dixit-Stiglitz model as overwhelming for our purposes. Essen-
Introduction                                                               7


tially, it offers a way to respect the effects of increasing returns at the
level of the firm without getting bogged down in them. By assuming
that those sectors of the economy subject to increasing returns also sat-
isfy the peculiar assumptions of the Dixit-Stiglitz model, we can ensure
that we have represented market structure in an internally consistent
way without repeatedly going through a taxonomy of oligopoly mod-
els. Dixit-Stiglitz also happens to lend itself naturally to general equilib-
rium analysis, in which there are no loose ends about where money
comes from and where it goes. Above all, because Dixit-Stiglitz-type
markets have a large number of firms, usually represented as a contin-
uum, we can reconcile two seemingly incompatible goals: respecting
the integer nature of individual choices under increasing returns (each
good is typically produced in only one location) while representing the
aggregate of such choices with continuous variables (such as the share
of production carried out in a particular location). In short, Dixit-
Stiglitz lets us have our cake in discrete lumps while doing calculus
on it, too.
   Even with Dixit-Stiglitz, modeling a multilocation economy requires
some further funny but useful assumptions distinctive to the new eco-
nomic geography (as opposed to the ”new trade” or ’’new growth”
literatures). One key simplification is the assumption that transporta-
tion costs take Samuelson’s ”iceberg” form: Rather than modeling a
separate transportation sector, we suppose that a fraction of a good
shipped simply melts away or evaporates in transit. There turns out
to be a tremendous synergy between the assumption of iceberg trans-
port costs and the Dixit-Stiglitz model, in the sense that combining
them causes many potentially nasty technical complications simply to,
well, melt away.
   A bigger departure from the new trade and new growth literature
comes in our repeated use of a sort of evolutionary dynamics to make
sense of what are mainly static models. It is very hard to talk about
economic geography without using a language that suggests dynamic
stories. When one speaks of a cumulative process by which spatial con-
centration reinforces itself, one has a definite image of a snowballing
urban or regional concentration, developing over time. Yet to insist
that models of economic geography explicitly model firms and house-
holds as making intertemporal decisions based on rational expectations
would greatly complicate an already difficult subject. It is very tempt-
ing to take a shortcut: to write down static models, then impose ad hoc
dynamics on those models by, say, assuming that workers migrate only
8                                                                 Chapter 1


gradually to locations that offer higher real wage rates, and to use this
ad hoc assumption to categorize some equilibria as stable, others as
unstable. We have systematically given in to this temptation.
   This may require some further discussion. Ad hoc dynamics have
been very much out of fashion in economics for the past twenty-five
years; dynamics are supposed to emerge from rational, maximizing
decisions by individual agents. Yet what is one to do when a model
predicts the existence of multiple equilibria, as geography models usu-
ally do? Game theorists have wrestled with this question, suggesting
a variety of ways to "refine" the set of equilibria. In recent years, they
have increasingly come to accept the idea that it is at least useful to
try to assess the stability of equilibria by imagining a process in which
strategies become more or less prevalent over time based on how well
they perform, in the same way that strategies organisms follow evolve
under the pressure of natural selection. The funny thing is that modern
"evolutionary game theory" often looks quite a lot like old-fashioned
ad hoc dynamics. And indeed, the basic dynamic approach taken in
our first model (see chapter 5) turns out to be identical to the "replicator
dynamics" now considered respectable among economic game theo-
rists. (Game theorists in biology, of course, regard the assumption that
strategies evolve myopically as a principle rather than a dubious short-
cut.) In short, we believe that we are right to give in to the temptation
to sort out equilibria using simple, evolutionary dynamic stories, even
though the models do not ground these dynamics in any explicit deci-
sion making over time.
   Finally, even with all the special assumptions we have described,
models of economic geography can easily seem too complicated for
paper-and-pencil analysis. Yet if one is prepared to assign particular
numbers to the parameters, the computer can often solve them easily.
A hallmark of the new economic geography, as compared with the new
trade and new growth literatures, has been its willingness to turn
where necessary to computer-assisted thinking: to use high-tech nu-
merical examples to guide and supplement analytical results.
   That said, in the course of working on this book we have found that
one can often learn more from pencil and paper than one might at
first have thought. It often turns out that it is extremely useful to start
analyzing a model by looking at numerical examples and simulations,
but that these numerical results then suggest the form of a solution
that can be derived in large part analytically. We are unabashed about
the use of the computer as an analytical tool, but this book has turned
Introduction                                                               9


out to have a more analytical underpinning, and to be less reliant on
purely numerical results, than we expected.

1.4 Two Useful Questions

One might ask many questions about economic geography, and we
touch on a number of issues over the course of this book. We are, how-
ever, able to stress the commonalities among a number of different
models by subjecting each model to one or both of two related but not
quite identical questions:
  When is a spatial concentration of economic activity sustairzable? Under
what conditions are the advantages created by such a concentration,
should it somehow come into existence, sufficient to maintain it?
  When is a symmetric equilibrium, without spatial corrcentrafion, unstable?
Under what conditions do small differences among locations snowball
into larger differences over time, so that the symmetry between identi-
cal locations spontaneously breaks?
Or to put it differently, the first question asks whether the economy can
support something other than backyard capitalism, whether backyard
capitalism is a necessary outcome; the second, whether backyard capi-
talism automatically unravels, whether it is a possible outcome.
   The answers to both of these questions hinge on the balance between
centripetal forces, forces that tend to promote spatial concentration of
economic activity, and centrifugal forces that oppose such concentra-
tion. They are not quite the same question, however, essentially be-
cause the first asks whether a situation is an equilibrium, the second
whether an equilibrium is stable. Take, for example, the case of the two-
region model analyzed in chapter 5 . The first question asks whether, if
we simply posit that all manufacturing is concentrated in one region,
a worker who defects to the other region finds that doing so improves
his real wage; if it does, the concentration of manufacturing is not an
equilibrium. The second question asks whether, starting from an equi-
librium in which manufacturing is equally divided between the two
regions, a movement of a small number of workers from one region
to the other raises or lowers the relative wage in the destination region;
if it raises it, the symmetric initial situation is unstable against small
perturbations.
   In the course of writing this book, we have discovered two important
(and surprising, at least to us) things about these two questions. First,
10                                                               Chapter 1


although the global behavior of new economic geography models is
usually analytically intractable and must be explored via the computer,
the answers to the two questions can usually be reduced to closed-
form expressions. That is, we can derive explicit formulas for the ”sus-
tain point” at which an economy with agglomeration becomes possible
and the “break point” at which an economy without agglomeration
becomes unstable. (Doing so typically involves guessing at the equilib-
rium, then confirming that guess, for the sustain point; it involves lin-
earizing the model around the symmetric equilibrium and solving it
in the case of the break point.) These expressions reveal clearly the role
of backward and forward linkages in creating and sustaining spatial
concentration.
   Second, across a variety of models that seem quite different on the
surface, a suitable redefinition of variables leads to the same expres-
sions for break point and sustain point. (This is particularly gratifying
in the case of the break point, because the equations are possible but
extremely annoying to solve; it is a great relief to find that this need
be done only once). In this sense we can claim to have developed a
theory of spatial concentration broader than any particular model, one
that helps us to see a number of different models as particular cases
of a more general approach.
   It is not always useful to ask both questions. Some models have no
sustain point: Although symmetry does break, the result is not a full
concentration of activity in one location. In the urban models of part 111,
on the other hand, the economic logic makes the question of symmetry
breaking uninteresting; as we will see, it makes much more sense to
posit the initial existence of one or more cities, then evolve new cities
by changing the economy until that initial spatial pattern becomes un-
sustainable. Still, because it is always useful to ask at least one of the
questions and often useful to ask both, we regard the two questions
as one of the book’s unifying themes.

1.5 Plan of the Book

The remainder of this book is in four parts. Part I is a selective and
analytical literature review. We are mainly concerned with the long
tradition of analysis in economic geography, a tradition that the main-
stream of economic theory may have neglected but that nonetheless
engaged in a process of cumulative development. We make a some-
what artificial distinction between two parts of that tradition. What we
Introduction                                                           11


call "urban economics," surveyed in chapter 2, consists mainly of the
von Thunen model, the attempt to explain cities by invoking black-box
agglomeration economies, and the use of those concepts in combina-
 tion in an urban systems theory different from but complementary to
much of what we try to do in this book. What we call "regional science"
 (as a catchall for an eclectic mix of approaches at best loosely modeled)
is closer in spirit to the general approach of this book, trying to derive
spatial concentration from the interactions among economies of scale,
transportation costs, and factor mobility; in chapter 3 we focus on
central-place theory, the dynamic base-multiplier model, and the con-
cept of market potential.
    Part I1 introduces our basic approach in the context of "regional"
models: models in which a primary sector, "agriculture," is immobile
across locations, but "manufacturing," a sector subject to increasing
returns, can move between regions. Chapter 4 introduces the necessary
technical tools in the form of the Dixit-Stiglitz model. Chapter 5 then
applies these tools to a minimal model that shows how a two-region
economy can become differentiated between an industrialized core and
an agricultural periphery; the chapter offers a first, and relatively sim-
ple, illustration of how numerical methods can be combined with anal-
ysis of the break and sustain points to understand the economy's
dynamics. Chapter 6 applies the same basic approach to multiregion
economies, especially to what we call the "racetrack economy," a styl-
ized economy with a large number of locations arrayed around the
circumference of a circle. We are able to get surprisingly clear results
about this multiregion economy using an approach Alan Turing (1952)
originally suggested for the analysis of morphogenesis in biology;
equally surprisingly, the Turing analysis turns out to hinge on the same
analysis of symmetry breaking that we applied in the two-region case.
Finally, both chapter 5 and chapter 6 rely on a very unrealistic simpli-
fying assumption: that agricultural goods can be transported costlessly.
This makes a difference; chapter 7 explores the consequences of costly
agricultural transport.
   Part I11 turns to a seemingly very different subject: the location of
cities in a world in which everything, including agriculture, is mobile.
Chapter 8 introduces the subject with a heuristic approach, in the spirit
of the regional science discussion in chapter 3, that helps provide a
guide to the more formal results. Chapter 9 develops a model that com-
bines a von Thunen-style approach to land rent with a linkage expla-
nation of manufacturing concentration, showing how a spatial pattern
12                                                              Chapter 1


in which an agricultural hinterland surrounds a single city can be self-
sustaining as long as the population is not too large. If the population
does become too large, it will be in the interest of a small group of
workers to move to some other location; so by using the criterion of
sustainability, it is possible to develop a model of the emergence of new
cities and hence of a multicity structure, a task carried out in chapter
10. If one then supposes that there are actually several manufacturing
industries, with different costs of transportation and / or economies of
scale, the process of city formation can yield a hierarchy of cities of
different types and sizes, as shown in chapter 11. Chapter 12 takes a
break from the main line of argument to discuss the striking and puz-
zling empirical regularities that characterize actual urban hierarchies.
Chapter 13 then returns to the main line of argument to show how
variations in the natural landscape, such as ports and rivers, can influ-
ence urban location.
   Part IV of the book, finally, turns to the analysis of international
trade, defined in this case as models in which labor is immobile among
locations. Here, however, we assume that manufacturing firms use
each others’ outputs as intermediate inputs. Chapter 14 shows that this
setup yields backward and forward linkages that can produce symme-
try breaking in exactly the same way that the movement of labor does
in the core-periphery model; in this case, however, the breaking and
restoration of symmetry drives international inequalities in wages.
That model suggests that the secular decline in transport costs can ex-
plain both the initial division of the world into industrial and nonin-
dustrial regions and the more recent spread of manufacturing to newly
industrializing economies. Chapter 15 offers an alternative explanation
of that spread, focusing instead on the effects of market growth. Chap-
ter 16 turns to the sources of international specialization within the
manufacturing sector and shows how industrial clusters can form and
dissolve. Chapter 17, paralleling chapter 6, analyzes international trade
without countries, that is, the emergence of regions of specialization
in a borderless world with continuous space. Finally, chapter 18 exam-
ines a possible interaction between international trade and the process
of urbanization within nations. Chapter 19 points to the way ahead.
   In all of this, we find remarkable and gratifying the extent to which
we can use the same basic modeling architecture to address so many
issues in seemingly disparate fields. But then our point is precisely
that these fields are not that disparate after all: Be it urban economics,
location theory, or international trade, it’s all about where economic
activity takes place-and why.
Some Intellectual
Background
This page intentionally left blank
2                                     Antecedents I: Urban
                                      Economics




Whereas the economics profession has notably neglected economic ge-
ography in general, one branch of the field by necessity has always
been forced to take spatial concerns into account: urban economics.
And indeed urban economics, although often regarded as peripheral
to the profession’s central concerns, has a long and deep intellectual
tradition. It would be beyond the scope of this book to offer anything
like a comprehensive survey of that tradition. In this chapter we restrict
ourselves to a brief summary of several strands in urban economics on
which our own analysis draws: the von Thiinen model of land use,
which plays a central role in urban theory to this day and also plays
a key role in part 111 of this book; the general notion of external econo-
mies as the explanation of urban concentrations; and the seminal work
of J. V. Henderson and his followers on models of urban systems,
which provides an alternative and complementary take on some of the
issues this book raises.

2.1 The von Thunen Model

How do economists routinely deal with the question of how the econ-
omy organizes its use of space? The short answer is that mostly they
do not deal with the question at all. But when they do, they generally
turn to a class of models pioneered in the early nineteenth century by
von Thiinen (1826).
   Von Thiinen envisaged an isolated town supplied by farmers in the
surrounding countryside. He supposed that crops differ in both their
yield per acre and their transportation costs and allowed for the possi-
bility that each crop could be produced with different intensities of
cultivation. And he asked two questions that might seem very differ-
ent: How should the land around the town be allocated to minimize
16                                                              Chapter 2


the combined costs of producing and transporting a given supply of
food to the town? How will the land actually be allocated if there is
an unplanned competition among farmers and landowners, with each
individual acting in his perceived self-interest?
   Von Thiinen showed that competition among the farmers will lead
to a gradient of land rents that declines from a maximum at the town
to zero at the outermost limit of cultivation. Each farmer will be faced
with a trade-off between land rents and transportation costs; because
transportation costs and yields differ among crops, a pattern of concen-
tric rings of production will result. In equilibrium, the land-rent gradi-
ent must be such as to induce farmers to grow just enough of each crop
to meet the demand, and it turns out that this condition together with
the condition that rents be zero for the outermost farmer suffices to
fully determine the outcome.
   Figure 2.1 illustrates schematically the typical outcome of a von Thu-
nen model. The upper part of the figure shows the equilibrium "bid-


Bid rent




                                                             from city




Figure 2.1
Bid-rent curves and land use
Antecedents I: Urban Economics                                          17


 rent” curves, the rent that farmers would be willing to pay at any given
 distance from the town, for three crops. The heavy line, the envelope
 of the bid-rent curves, defines the rent gradient. Along each of the three
 segments of that line, growers of one of the crops are willing to pay
 more for land than the others. Thus one gets concentric rings of cultiva-
 tion, with the bottom half of the figure showing a quarter section of
 the layout.
    Von Thiinen’s model may now seem quite simple and obvious,
but it is actually an ingenious and quite deep analysis. In particular,
 it is a striking example of the power of economic modeling to generate
unexpected insights. After all, the problem of which crops to grow
where is not that easy: By allocating an acre of land near the city
to some one crop, you indirectly affect the costs of delivering all
other crops, because you force them to be grown further away. Except
in the case where there is no possibility of varying the land intensity
of cultivation, it is by no means trivial to determine either what should
be done or what will happen in an unplanned market. Yet von Thunen
analysis shows us that there is a clear answer to what will happen:
the spontaneous emergence of a concentric ring pattern. Indeed, the
concentric rings will emerge even if no farmer knows what anyone
else is growing, so that nobody is aware that the rings are there.
Moreover, that analysis tells us something that economics has trained
us to expect but that remains startling (and implausible) to most
noneconomists: this unplanned outcome is efficient, is indeed the
same as the optimal plan. More specifically, unplanned competition
will allocate crops to land in a way that minimizes the total com-
bined cost of producing and transporting the crops-not including
the land rent. This is surely as nice an example of the ”invisible hand”
as you could want. Each farmer is trying to maximize his income and
is therefore very much concerned with land rents, yet the collective
behavior of farmers minimizes a function in which land rents do not
appear.
    The von Thiinen model had an important rebirth in the 1960s, when
Alonso (1964) reinterpreted that model by substituting commuters for
farmers and a central business district for the isolated town. This
”monocentric city model” again yielded concentric rings of land use,
and it remains to this day the basis for an extensive theoretical and
empirical literature.’
    Yet von Thunen-type models have an important limitation: Although
they give a beautifully clear explanation of land use surrounding
18                                                              Chapter 2


a town (or land use within a metropolitan area surrounding a central
business district), they simply assume the existence of the town or busi-
ness district itself. That does not make for a bad model, but it does
make for a limited one. If your question is not simply how land use
is determined given a preexisting town, but rather how land use is
determined when the location of the town or towns-indeed, their
number and size-is itself endogenous, the von Thunen model offers
no help. Urban economists have, of course, been aware of this limita-
tion; thus in practice they have always supplemented the von Thunen
model with at least a sketchy theory of agglomeration based on exter-
nal economies.

2.2 Explaining Cities: External Economies

The concept of external economies was introduced by Alfred Marshall,
who illustrated that concept by discussing the advantages of producing
in an ”industrial district,” such as the Sheffield cutlery district. From
its beginnings, in other words, the concept of external economies has
been closely allied with the reality of spatial concentration, and exter-
nal economies have been given a central role in urban theory at least
since the work of Hoover (1948).
   As we pointed out in chapter 1, Marshall’s discussion identified three
reasons why a producer might find it advantageous to locate near other
producers in the same industry. First, a geographically concentrated
industry could support specialized local providers of inputs. Second,
a concentration of firms employing workers of the same type would
offer labor market pooling: Workers would be less likely to remain
unemployed if their current employer did badly, apd firms would be
more likely to find available labor if they did well. Finally, geographic
proximity would facilitate the spread of information.
   Marshall’s trinity of external economies has proved notoriously hard
to model in any formal way. In effect, the approach taken in this book
amounts to a formalization of something like his first source of external
benefits: market size /market access effects, when producers are subject
both to transport costs and to increasing returns. We make no effort
to formalize the rest of his story. However, Marshall’s argument con-
vinced urban economists that they did, in at least a rough sense, under-
stand why cities and central business districts exist. And by putting
external economies into their models, albeit in a sort of black-box man-
ner that left the nature (and, a crucial defect for our purposes, the geo-
Antecedents I: Urban Economics                                          19


graphical reach) of those external economies unspecified, they were
able to come up with a useful and insightful analysis that views the
whole economy as a system of cities.

2.3 Urban Systems

A generation ago Henderson (1974) introduced a model of the econ-
omy as an urban system-that is, as a collection of cities-that remains
the workhorse approach for research into the actual distribution of
sizes and types of urban areas (see in particular his own later work
(1980, 1988)).
   The basic idea of Henderson’s analysis is extremely simple: As au-
thors such as Mills (1967) have emphasized, there is a tension between
external economies associated with geographic concentration of indus-
try within a city, on one side, and diseconomies such as commuting
costs associated with large cities, on the other. The net effect of this
tension is that the relationship between the size of a city and the utility
of a representative resident is an inverted U , like the one shown in
figure 2.2.


Utility
                            0




                                                          Population

Figure 2.2
City size and utility
20                                                              Chapter 2


   It might seem obvious that if this is the trade-off between city size
and welfare, all cities will be of the optimum size, as indicated by point
0. This is in fact Henderson’s assertion; but it is, as he recognizes, not
quite that easy. The way he argues that cities will in fact tend to be of
optimal size and the way he alters the model to get multiple sizes of
cities are what makes his work distinctive.
   Suppose for a moment that there were too few cities-and thus that
the typical city were too large, that is, it lay somewhere along the arc
OM.’ Then it is straightforward to see that no individual resident
would have any incentive to move to a new location: Any existing city
would still yield a higher level of welfare than moving in isolation to
a new location. This seems to imply the possibility both of substantially
excessive city sizes and of multiple equilibria in the size distribution
as well as location of cities. Henderson argues, however, that reality is
simplified through the forward-looking behavior of large agents: Any
situation with too few cities would offer a profit opportunity. Anyone
who could organize a “city corporation” that moves a number of peo-
ple to a new city of optimal size would be able to profit (perhaps
through land prices). It turns out that developers of often startling size
play a significant role in urban growth in the United States. So Hender-
son argues that the actual city sizes are, to a first approximation,
optimal.
   But then why are cities of such different sizes? Here Henderson’s
argument runs as follows: External economies tend to be specific to
particular industries, but diseconomies tend to depend on the overall
size of a city, whatever it produces. This asymmetry has two conse-
quences. First, because there are diseconomies to city size, it makes no
sense to put industries without mutual spillovers in the same city: If
steel production and publishing generate few mutual external econo-
mies, steel mills and publishing houses should be in different cities,
where they do not generate congestion and high land rents for each
other. So each city should be specialized (at least in its ”export” indus-
tries) in one or a few industries that create external economies. Second,
the extent of these external economies may vary greatly across indus-
tries: A textile city may have little reason to include more than a hand-
ful of mills, whereas a banking center might do best if it contains
practically all of a nation’s financial business. So the optimal size of
city will depend on its role.
   The last step in Henderson’s analysis is to argue that relative prices
will adjust so that the welfare of representative residents in cities of
Antecedents I: Urban Economics                                      21



Utility




                                                    Population

Figure 2.3
City specialization


whatever type is the same. The end picture will look like figure 2.3:
Each type of city will have an optimum size; at the optimum size, each
will yield the same utility, but that size will vary depending on the
type of city.
   It is a beautifully clear analysis. It does, however, have two some-
what disturbing aspects.
   One difficulty with Henderson-type models is the way that they rely
on the hypothetical city corporation to tie down the actual numbers
and sizes of cities. Henderson is surely right that developers often do
internalize agglomeration externalities. The formation of ”edge cities”
(a term introduced by Joel Garreau (1991) to describe the vast suburban
shopping mall and office complexes that nowadays rival or even dwarf
American downtowns) is sometimes spontaneous but often reflects de-
liberate large-scale planning by huge real estate operations. How-
ever, when we come to the economy’s really big spatial aspects-the
emergence and growth of whole metropolitan areas, regions, or even
nations-one would like a story that places more emphasis on out-
of-control invisible-hand processes.
   The other slightly frustrating limitation of Henderson-type mod-
els is that although they deal with an essentially spatial issue, they
are themselves aspatial. In general they do not even model cities’
22                                                                Chapter 2


internal structure, although that can be dealt with by assuming that
the externality-yielding activities must all be concentrated in a central
business district. And they certainly have nothing to say about where
cities themselves are located, relative to each other or to anything else.
For many purposes this may not be an important question, but if our
intention is to bring space back into economics, explaining where cities
are and why becomes a central concern.

2.4 Multiple Subcenters

Our mention of edge cities brings up an issue that has often proved
awkward for urban economists but has also been the subject of some
interesting economic research. As suggested above, the main spatial
tradition in urban economics has derived from von Thiinen; the classic
monocentric city model represents a more or less direct substitution of
urban commuters for von Thiinen’s farmers, with the central business
district substituting for von Thiinen’s isolated town. And urban econo-
mists have justified the central place, town, or business district by an
appeal to some kind of external economies.
   Unfortunately, modern metropolitan areas are not monocentric and
have become steadily less so. Even those cities that still have a vital,
traditional downtown typically have a number of subcenters that rival
that downtown in terms of employment; in this sense they are more
like countries with a number of large, competing cities than like von
Thiinen’s isolated state. This means, in turn, that an attempt to model
a modern metropolitan area, even taking the existence of that area as
a given, requires some way of thinking about how the location of em-
ployment within that area is determined.
   To do this, one must get at least slightly inside the external economy
black box to ask how far external economies reach. That is, it will no
longer do to assume that they apply equally to all producers within a
central business district and not at all to producers outside that district.
   An example of an attempt to open up the black box a little bit is
Fujita and Ogawa (1982), which assumes external economies between
producers that decline with distance. These external economies pro-
vide a ”centripetal” force that pulls employment into concentrated
business districts. On the other side, they maintain a structure of work-
ers who require living space and thus must commute to these business
districts, which means that given any particular distribution of employ-
ment there will be a von Thiinen-type trade-off between commuting
Antecedents I: Urban Economics                                        23


costs and land rent; this in turn creates a ”centrifugal” force, because
businesses that locate in low-rent locations well away from existing
concentrations can attract workers at lower wages. Fujita and Ogawa
found that this type of model can support polycentric urban struc-
tures that look more like modern metropolitan areas than the mono-
centric model. They also found that the attempt to characterize the
possible equilibria even of a simple model of this kind can rapidly
become a daunting task; as we will see repeatedly in this book, it
is crucial in spatial analysis to have some way to narrow down the
set of equilibria one considers. (Our usual answer will be a ”hypotheti-
cal history,” a story about how the economy evolves over time that
allows us to visit only a limited subset of the large, perhaps infinite
possibilities.)

2.5 Uses and Limits of Traditional Urban Economics

We have surveyed only very briefly a substantial and valuable field.
Traditional urban economics has provided valuable insights into land
use within and around cities and the reasons why cities exist as well
as a convincing view of the economy as an urban system. We do not
expect the approach taken in this book to supplant or even to compete
with the urban economics tradition: Rather, we hope that the two ap-
proaches will prove complementary.
   That said, traditional urban economics has some obvious limits. To
the extent that it does provide a theory of the spatial economy, it is a
theory of why and how activity spreads out-of centrifugal forces-
without any comparable attention to centripetal forces. (One might say
that urban economists have been a bit like geologists before plate tec-
tonics: deeply sophisticated about the forces that tear mountains down,
but lacking any real model of why they rise in the first place.) Although
urban economists have some plausible stories about agglomeration,
these are an ad hoc add-on to their models. Above all, because the
stories about agglomeration lack a spatial dimension-because they
do not explain how such effects might fall off with distance-tradi-
tional urban economics lacks the kind of distance-related tension be-
tween centripetal and centrifugal forces that, as we will see, is at the
heart of our attempt to develop a theory of spatial economics.
   There is, however, a quite different intellectual tradition that has
tried to understand that tension. We turn to that tradition in the next
chapter.
24                                                                                Chapter 2


Notes

1 . Much of that literature is concerned with determining the rent curve and the pattern
of land use when labor and capital may be substituted for land in the production of
housing and other services. There have also been extensive investigations of the implica-
tions of congestion, of the use of land for roads, and other issues. A detailed examination
of these issues may be found in Fujita 1989. We concentrate here only on the literature
directly relevant to the line of inquiry in this book.
2. It is straightforward to see that a situation in which there are too many cities, and
thus where the typical city is too small, is unstable: Some of the cities will simply collapse.
3                                     Antecedents 11: Regional
                                      Science




It may seem peculiar that we offer two chapters on antecedents, one
on urban economics and one on regional science. Aren’t these the same
subject? In practice, however, modeling in economic geography has
progressed along two largely independent tracks.’ On one side, urban
economics as surveyed in chapter 2 has evolved as a part of mainstream
economics; it has the great virtue of being characterized by meticulous
and clear-minded modeling but has tended to neglect certain issues,
above all the question of where cities form and their spatial relationship
to each other. On the other side, another tradition has at least partly
addressed the questions that urban economics has slighted. This tradi-
tion is largely German in origin but was made available to the English-
speaking world through the seminal writings of Walter Isard (1956),
who made it the basis of a new field he called ”regional science.”
   Both this older German tradition and modern regional science have
a characteristic looseness in reasoning: Not only is the analysis usually
vague about market structure, it is often blurry about budget con-
straints and sometimes seems to confuse planning solutions with mar-
ket outcomes. These weaknesses have played a significant role in
keeping the contributions of regional science in particular from being
widely accepted or even known among economists. Yet regional sci-
ence offers valuable insights that survive the translation to more rigor-
ous models. Indeed, once tightly specified models have confirmed
some of these insights, one can see that looser, deliberately sloppy
models often have their place: they can serve as back-of-the-envelope
“models of the models,” helping us develop intuition without the alge-
braic complexity that easily emerges when one tries to dot all is and
cross all fs.
   In this chapter we selectively survey several ideas from location the-
ory and regional science that bear directly on the questions addressed
26                                                               Chapter 3


in this book: the famous but problematic ”central-place theory” devel-
oped to explain the pattern of city sizes and locations, the crude but
useful tool of ”base-multiplier” analysis of regional growth, and the
ad hoc but also useful idea of ”market potential” analysis.

3.1 Central-Place Theory

Economics as we know it is largely, though not entirely, an Anglo-
Saxon tradition. Location theory, however, was long a German tradi-
tion, containing at least three streams. One stream followed from the
von Thiinen analysis of land rent and land use, discussed in chapter
2. A second stream, associated with Alfred Weber and his followers,
focused on the issue of optimal plant location; that literature plays no
role in our discussion. But a third tradition at first sight seems to offer
an answer to the question of how economies of scale and transport
costs interact to produce a spatial economy: the central-place theory of
Christaller (1933) and Losch (1940).
   The basic ideas of central-place theory seem powerfully intuitive.
Imagine a featureless plain, inhabited by an evenly spread population
of farmers. Imagine also that some activities that serve the farmers can-
not be evenly spread because they are subject to economies of scale:
manufacturing, administration, and so on. Then it seems obvious that
the trade-off between scale economies and transportation costs will
lead to the emergence of a lattice of ”central places,’’ each serving the
surrounding farmers.
   Less obvious, but still intuitively persuasive once presented, are the
refinements introduced by Christaller and Losch. Christaller argued,
and produced evidence in support, that central places form a hierarchy:
There are a large number of market towns, every group of market
towns is focused on a larger administrative center (which is also a mar-
ket town), and so on. Losch pointed out that if a lattice is going to
minimize transportation costs for a given density of central places, the
market areas must be hexagonal. Thus every textbook on location the-
ory contains a picture of an idealized central-place system in which a
hierarchy of central places occupies a set of nested hexagons.
   The original story in central-place theory applied to towns serving
a rural market. But a similar story can obviously be applied to business
districts within a metropolitan area. Small neighborhood shopping dis-
tricts are scattered across the basins that surround larger districts with
more specialized stores, all eventually centering on the downtown,
Antecedents 11: Regional Science                                           27


with its great department stores and high-end boutiques. Indeed, the
hierarchical image is so natural that it is hard to avoid describing things
that way.
   Unfortunately, as soon as one begins to think hard about central-
place theory one realizes that it does not quite hang together as an
economic model. In economic modeling we try to show how a phenom-
enon emerges (there’s one of those words again) from the interaction
of decisions by individual families or firms; the most satisfying models
are those in which the emergent behavior is most surprising given
the players’ ”micromotives.” What is therefore deeply disappointing
about central place theory is that it gives no account along these lines.
Losch showed that a hexagonal lattice is efficient; he did not describe
a decentralized process from which it might emerge. Christaller sug-
gested the plausibility of a hierarchical structure; he gave no account
of how individual actions would produce such a hierarchy (or even
sustain one once it had been somehow created).
  What, then, is central-place theory? It is not a causal model. It is
probably best to think of it as a classification scheme, a way of organiz-
ing our perceptions and our data. It is at best a description, rather than
an explanation, of the economy’s spatial structure.

3.2 Base-Multiplier Analysis

When one looks at the economy of a city or region, it is fairly natural
to think of that region’s economic activities as being divided into two
types. First, there are those activities that satisfy demands from outside
the region: the region’s “export base”; second are the activities that
mainly supply goods and services to local residents. Thus the economy
of metropolitan Los Angeles consists on one side of film studios, arms
manufacturers, and so on who produce for the U.S. or world market,
on the other side of restaurants, supermarkets, dentists, and so on who
sell only locally.
  The main idea of what has come to be known as base-multiplier anal-
ysis is that the export activities are, in effect, a region’s economic raison
d’etre-its ”economic base”-whereas the other, ”nonbase” activities
are derived from that base and grow or shrink depending on the base’s
performance. For example, the Center for Continuing Study of the Cali-
fornia Economy estimates that California’s export sector employs only
about 25 percent of the state’s labor force; nonetheless, when the center
analyzed the severe California recession of 1990-93, it focused its
28                                                            Chapter 3


attention on the reasons why employment in California’s export indus-
tries had shrunk (mainly defense cutbacks following the end of the
Cold War and a slump in the world aircraft industry), treating the de-
cline in the rest of the state’s economy as a derived result.
   Base-multiplier analysis is often given a specific linear formulation
that gives it a textbook Keynesian feel. Suppose we let X be the income
generated in a region’s export sector and treat that income as exoge-
nous. And suppose that a constant fraction a of income is spent locally
on nonbase products. Then the direct earnings X from exports will lead
to a second round of earnings a X as some of the money is spent locally,
which will in turn generate a third round a2X as this income in turn
is spent, and so on. Taking all the multiplier effects into account, we
find that regional income Y is determined by




  So far this looks like a useful approximation for short- or medium-
term forecasting but an approach with little bearing on the kinds of
questions we want to ask in this book. However, the base-multiplier
approach becomes much more interesting if we adopt a view largely
associated with the influential book by Pred (1966): that the share of
income spent locally is not a constant but rather depends on the size
of the local market.
  What Pred and others suggested was that as the size of the regional
economy grows, it becomes profitable to produce a wider range of
goods and services locally, because the market becomes large enough
to support an efficient scale plant. (Pred also suggested a number of
other reasons why growth of the regional economy might encourage
increased production, but let us focus only on this reason for the mo-
ment.) Pred then argued that this relationship could set in motion a
cumulative process of regional growth: As the regional economy ex-
pands, a rises, which means a larger multiplier and thus a further rise
in Y, and so on.
   Rather oddly, neither Pred nor any of the many geographers and
regional scientists who have cited his work seem to have been inclined
to formalize this extension of the base-multiplier model. A simple alge-
braic representation of the basic idea turns out, however, to reveal
some unexpected subtleties in even so simple a story.
   Consider, then, the following simple extension of the base-multiplier
model: We suppose that a is an increasing function of the previous
Antecedents 11: Regional Science                                        29




      0            1.0 .-         2 .o           3 .O   X
                       a( 1-@/a           1/4a

Figure 3.1
Equilibria in the base-multiplier model


period's Y . (We introduce this lag to give the model some rudimentary
dynamics.) In particular, let us suppose that a, is proportional to Y,-l
up to some maximum value, a:

a, = min[aY,-l, a].                                                  (3.2)
The interesting case turns out to be when ii > 0.5, so let us assume that
to be true. In that case, the equilibrium relationship between X and Y
turns out to look like figure 3.1, where bold solid lines represent stable
equilibria and the bold broken line represents an unstable equilibrium.
(The figure is calculated for a = 0.1, a = 0.8.) To derive this figure, we
make two provisional analyses, then modify them.
  First, ignore for a moment the upper limit on a. Then the equilibrium
relationship between X and Y would be determined by




with the equilibrium values

Y =1LdFZE                                                            (3.4)
     2a
This equation defines "high" and "low" equilibria for Y up to X =
1 / 4 a . However, the high equilibrium is not relevant if it implies an a
30                                                                Chapter 3


greater than a. And if we use the dynamics given in (3.2),then the high
equilibrium is also unstable, because an increase in Y,-, brings a greater
than proportional increase in Y,.
   Second, ignore for a moment the dependence of a on Y. As long as
a takes on its maximum value, we have

y=--- X                                                                (3.5)
    1-a'
Notice that the high value of Y from (3.4) is relevant only if it is less
than the value of Y implied by (3.5).However, (3.5)itself describes an
equilibrium only if aY > 17, which is true only for
       a(1 - U )
X>-.
          a
  We now have all the pieces. For X < ii(1 - a ) / a , there is a unique
equilibrium:




For n ( l - a) / a < X < 1/4a, Y has three equilibrium values: a stable
equilibrium corresponding to (3.7),another higher stable equilibrium
corresponding to (3.5),and between them an unstable equilibrium cor-
responding to the other solution to (3.4).Finally, for X > 1/4a, (3.5)
determines the unique solution.
   To understand the economic significance of this picture, let us con-
sider two imaginary economic histories: one in which the size of the
export base gradually increases from a very low level, another in which
it gradually declines from a very high level. In the first case, we can imag-
ine ourselves moving gradually up the lower solid line in figure 3.1. As
export income rises, total regional income also rises and does so more
than proportionately as the share of income spent locally increases. When
X exceeds 1/4a, however, the process undergoes a qualitative change:
Now Pred's cumulative process sets in, in which rising regional income
leads to a higher multiplier that raises regional income even more. In the
case illustrated in figure 3.1, an increase in X from slightly less than to
slightly more than 2.5 causes Y to rise from 5 to 12.5.
   Conversely, suppose that X gradually declines. Then regional in-
come first declines proportionately as we slide down the upper solid
line. When X falls below a(l - @ / a ,however, a cumulative process
Antecedents 11: Regional Science                                       31


of decline sets in, in which falling regional income leads to a falling
multiplier. In the figure, a drop in X from slightly more to slightly less
than 1.6 leads to a drop in Y from 8 to 2.
  This extended base-multiplier model is unsatisfactory in a number
of ways. In terms of modeling strategy, it suffers from a severe case
of ad hockery: The nature of competition, in particular, is completely
unclear. In terms of real-world relevance, the model also has some se-
vere defects. In particular:
  As an empirical matter, the influence of market size on the local share
of spending, although real, seems unlikely to be large enough to gener-
ate the kind of interesting dynamics shown in figure 3.1. The problem
is not that large regions have too low a local spending share: As pointed
out above, California’s nonbase employment appears to be about 75
percent of the total. Rather, it is that even quite small local economies
appear to have a surprisingly high local spending share: Henderson
(1980) suggested, using the examples of one-industry towns, that even
in small cities nonbase employment is more than half the total. To res-
cue the idea of cumulative growth, one must suppose that a large re-
gional economy offers other sorts of benefits, for example, forward
linkages from the supply of intermediate inputs. Indeed Pred empha-
sized such additional linkages, but they do spoil the simplicity of the
basic story.
  Associated with this difficulty is the clearly unsatisfactory device of
treating the size of the export base X as exogenous. Many of the most
celebrated examples of cumulative agglomeration processes, such as
the rise of Silicon Valley, arose not from import substitution but from
the self-reinforcing growth of the export sector.
  Finally, the whole base-multiplier distinction runs into substantial
difficulties when one tries to apply it not to a region in isolation but
to the economy as a whole. For the world as a whole, all goods are
sold ”locally,” and all income is also spent locally; that is, equation
(3.1)becomes O/O, which is not a very helpful result.
  For all these reasons, it is essential to go beyond the base-multiplier
approach to the more fully consistent models developed in the rest of
this book. Nonetheless, this model does give us four insights that are
useful throughout the book:
1. The interaction between economies of scale and endogenous market
size can lead to a cumulative process of agglomeration.
32                                                             Chapter 3


2. It is important to study not only static equilibria but also, at least
in a rudimentary way, dynamics, because dynamics play a crucial sim-
plifying role, limiting the number of possible outcomes.
3. The dynamics of economies in which scale economies and market
size interact typically involve the possibility of discontinuous change:
A cumulative process begins when underlying parameters cross some
critical value.
4. Finally, and more subtly, the critical value for change in one
direction is usually not the same as the critical value for change in
the other; for example, in figure 3.1, the regional economy will
not ”explode” until X > 2.5, but it will not ”implode” unless X
< 1.6.
   This last observation requires a bit more emphasis. In many of the
models we discuss later in this book, we will need to distinguish be-
tween two criteria for agglomeration. On one side, we will ask when
a uniform spatial economy, without agglomerations, spontaneously be-
gins to develop concentrations of population and / or industry; this
”symmetry breaking’’ occurs at a critical value we will refer to as the
break poitzf. On the other hand, agglomerations, once established, are
usually able to survive even under conditions that would not cause
them to form in the first place; we will refer to the critical value at
which established agglomerations are no longer sustainable as the siis-
taitz point.

3.3 Market Potential Analysis

Producers, other things being the same, obviously prefer sites with
good access to customers. But how should one measure the market
access of such sites? We will see in later chapters that it is possible,
within a well-defined model structure, to define market access in a
precise way. For many years, however, it has been standard practice
among geographers to use ad hoc but more or less reasonable measures
of market potential both to describe the proximity advantages of differ-
ent locations and to predict trends in actual location.
   The typical market potential function measures the potential of some
site r as a weighted sum of the purchasing power of all other sites s,
with the weights being a declining function of distance. Thus a simple,
widely used version weights purchasing power inversely to distance,
so that the market potential at r is
Antecedents 11: Regional Science                                        33




where Dr, is the distance from r to s, and P, is the purchasing power
at s.
   The classic market potential study was by Harris (1954), who tried
to use market potential to explain the location of manufacturing in the
United States. Harris used several measures of market potential, rang-
ing from (3.8) to a measure of average distance to consumers. His re-
sults showed that the heavily industrialized regions of the United
States were in general also locations with exceptionally high market
potential. This was not too surprising: Precisely because a large part
of U.S. population and production was concentrated in the manufac-
turing belt, locations in that belt had better market access than locations
elsewhere in the country. But this simple observation led Harris to a
suggestion similar in spirit to the exciting possibility we have already
seen from considering the impact of scale economies in a base-
multiplier context: that the concentration of production was self-
reinforcing. Not only did firms choose to produce in regions with good
access to markets, but also access to markets tended to be good in re-
gions in which many firms chose to produce.
   Like base-multiplier analysis, this is an idea that seems highly plausi-
ble on its face. Market potential analysis also seems to avoid some of
the problems created by base-multiplier analysis: there is no need to
distinguish between base and nonbase activities, and therefore no para-
dox created when one tries to think about the evolution of the geogra-
phy of the economy as a whole. Moreover, market potential analysis
offers a tantalizing hint of how it might be possible to think in terms
of continuous space rather than prespecified regions.

3.4 Limitations of Regional Science

Regional science never quite took on the role that Isard had envisaged.
The ad hoc nature of its models, their lack of closure, the general sense
of loose ends left hanging prevented it from becoming a well-inte-
grated part of mainstream economics. Indeed, regional science never
even managed to become integrated with traditional urban economics.
   What regional science did become was a toolbox for practical analy-
sis: a set of methods that regional planners, transportation depart-
ments, and so on around the world could use to help guide policy
34                                                              Chapter 3


decisions. For decisions must be made, even if no rigorous framework
exists on which to base them, and a suggestive analysis that leaves
loose ends hanging but at least addresses the right questions is better
than a rigorous analysis that assumes them away.
  It turns out that the key insights of central-place theory, of base-
multiplier analysis, of market potential can be given a more buttoned-
down justification. They do not come out exactly the way the ad hoc
modelers formulated them-careful modeling has some pa yoffs-but
we view our work to an important degree as a continuation, perhaps
even a validation, of Isard’s project.

Appendix: A Brief Introduction to Bifurcations

The base-multiplier model of section 3.2 exhibits two bifiircations:
critical values of parameters at which the qualitative behavior of
the economy’s dynamics changes. Bifurcations like this are a recur-
ring feature of the models we develop in this book. They arise because
in many of our models there is a tension between centripetal forces-
forces that tend to promote agglomera tion-and centrifugal forces
pushing the other way. Changes in factors exogenous to our models,
such as transportation costs, shift the balance between centripetal
and centrifugal forces; often there are critical points, bifurcations, at
which this shift changes the qualitative behavior of the economy’s
dynamics.
   Although mathematicians have studied a vast variety of bifurcations,
two basic types appear repeatedly in simple models of economic geog-
raphy; we offer here an informal introduction to these characteristic
bifurcations.
   First, let us introduce a sort of generic geography model. We imagine
a setting in which something-typically manufacturing production or
labor-must be allocated between two regions. We let h be the share
of manufacturing in one of the regions, with 1 - h the share in the
other; we suppose that the rate of change of h depends on its level;
and we assume that there is no inherent difference between the regions,
so that the curve showing d h / d t is symmetric around h = ‘/2 and passes
through 0 at h = V 2 .
   Now one might at first imagine that something like figure 3A.1 could
fully represent the model’s basic dynamics. Either the centrifugal forces
are stronger than the centripetal, in which case d h / d t is downward
sloping in h and the economy converges to a symmetric equilibrium;
Antecedents 11: Regional Science                                        35




  0




      0                            0.5                         1
                                                          3L
Figure 3G.1
B=O


or the centripetal forces are stronger, the symmetric equilibrium is un-
stable, and the economy tends toward a concentration of activity in
one region or the other. One need therefore only concern oneself with
determining the critical point at which the slope shifts from negative
to positive. Unfortunately, matters are not usually quite that simple,
because the relationship between d h / d t and h is not usually a straight
line; it is instead a curve, symmetric around h = V 2 , like figure 3A.2 or
figure 3A.5.
   The actual equations for the curve in the models we develop later
are forbiddingly complex; we invariably derive them numerically
rather than analytically (although some analytical results remain possi-
ble). We may gain considerable insight into the way these models
work, however, by considering the simplest possible equation that gen-
erates such a symmetric curve:
h = A ( h - 0.5) + B(3L - 0.5)3,                                    (3A.1)
with 0 5 h 5 1. (There is no h2 term because it would be inconsistent
with symmetry around h = 0.5.)
  Two observations are immediately possible about (3A.1). First, h =
0.5 is always an equilibrium. Second, that symmetric equilibrium is
36                                                             Chapter 3




     0                        0.5                         I
                                                      A
Figure 3A.2
A<O,B<O


stable (unstable) whenever A < 0 ( A > 0). So if we think of the balance
between centripetal and centrifugal forces as determining the value of
A , there is indeed some kind of a critical point where A switches from
negative to positive.
   What kind of critical point turns out to depend on the curvature of
the schedule relating h to its rate of change; in terms of (3A.1), it de-
pends on the sign of B:
1. B < 0: Let us look first at the case in which B < 0. In that case, the
picture when A < 0 looks like figure 3A.2, with the schedule going
from convex to concave. The symmetric equilibrium is both stable and
unique. There are two other roots of (3A.1),

                                                                  (3A.2)

but they are complex roots with no economic meaning.
  When A becomes positive, the picture looks like figure 3A.3. The
symmetric equilibrium becomes unstable but is flanked by two stable
equilibria defined by the roots of (3A.2).From both the picture and the
equation, these equilibria are obviously coincident at A = 0, then be-
come increasingly separated as A increases.
Antecedents IT: Regional Science                                      37



 3L




0




      I   .   .   . . . . . . . . . . - .     -   . - .
      0                        0.5                             1
                                                          3L
Figure 3A.3
A>O,B<O


   We may therefore summarize the way that the economy’s dynamics
change with the bifurcation diagram figure 3A.4. In this figure we plot
the equilibrium values of h as a function of A, with stable equilibria
represented by solid lines and unstable by broken lines. For A negative
there is a unique, stable, symmetric equilibrium; as A increases this
splits into two increasingly asymmetric equilibria. Figure 3A.4, then,
illustrates the well-known pitchfork bifircatioir.
   To understand the economics of figure 3A.4, we may suppose an
imaginary history in which A gradually increases over time. When the
balance shifts in favor of centripetal forces, random events cause one
region to attract slightly more manufacturing than the other; as A con-
tinues to rise, this advantage becomes magnified, and the regions be-
come increasingly asymmetric.
2. B > 0: Although standard-looking pitchfork bifurcations emerge in
some of our models, we more often find a somewhat different picture
(strictly speaking a variant-subcritical-form      of pitchfork bifurca-
tion). We can understand this bifurcation by considering the version
of (3A.1) with B > 0.
   For A strongly negative, this yields a picture like figure 3A.5. This
does not look very different from figure 3A.2, although the curve now
 38                                                                                  Chapter 3


  A
  A

  .o -
 1.0




 0.5 -




 0.0
       -

       -    t   -   .   .      .   -         .   .   .       -   .   -   .       -

       -1                      0                         1                   A
Figure 3A.4
B < 0: pitchfork bifurcation




      0                                0.5                                   1
                                                                     h
Figure 3A.5
A <?0, B > 0
Antecedents 11: Regional Science                                       39




   0                           0.5                         1
                                                       k
Figure 3A.6
A<O,B>O


goes from concave to convex. However, an inspection of (3A.2) reveals
that the equation's two nonsymmetric roots are now real numbers. We
see just one equilibrium in figure 3A.5 only because these roots lie out-
side the economically meaningful range 0 "= h 5 1.
   Now suppose that A is less strongly negative. Then the picture looks
like figure 3A.6. The symmetric equilibrium is still stable, but it is now
flanked by two unstable equilibria. If h should start outside the central
basin of attraction, all activity will end up concentrated in one region
or the other, either at an equilibrium with h = 0 (and d h / d t < 0) or
at one with h = 1 (and d h / d t > 0).
   From both the graph and from (3A.2), as A rises, the two unstable
equilibria obviously move inward toward the center, finally disap-
pearing when A becomes positive, at which point the picture looks like
figure 3A.7.
   The overall dynamic picture when €3 > 0 looks like figure 3A.8. For
A sufficiently negative there is a unique, stable, symmetric equilibrium.
When A passes one critical point, two stable agglomerative equilibria
emerge ( h = 0 or h = l),but at first the symmetric equilibrium remains
stable. Only when A becomes positive does full agglomeration become
the unique outcome. We refer to the type of dynamic behavior shown
in figure 3A.8 as a tomahawk bifurcation.*
40                                                            Chapter 3




       0                      0.5                     1
                                                  A
Figure 3A.7
A=O,B>O



 A

1 .o




0.5




0.0
           sustain point       Ibreak point
                -1              0             1           A
Figure 3A.8
B > 0: tomahawk bifurcation
Antecedents 11: Regional Science                                                        41



   When the economy exhibits tomahawk-type behavior, there are-
as we suggested in chapter 1 and saw in the specific case of the
base-multiplier model-two critical points in the balance between
centripetal and centrifugal forces. One is the point at which a symmet-
ric equilibrium becomes unstable and in which symmetry must there-
fore be broken; as noted earlier, we refer to this as the break point.
The other is the point at which agglomeration, once established, is self-
sustaining (i.e., where the roots in (3A.2) lie within the economically
meaningful range); what we call the sustain point. When the economy
is a tomahawk, it takes stronger centripetal forces to break a symmetric
equilibrium than to sustain an asymmetric one: The sustain point
comes before the break point.
   This has a further implication: If one imagines a process in which
we start with a symmetric economy, then gradually shift the balance in
favor of agglomeration, the continuous change in exogenous variables
produces a discontinuous change in actual outcomes-there is a ”ca-
tastrophe” when the economy passes the break point.
   A final observation: Alas, the dynamics our model implies are never
as simple as (3A.1).However, it is usually easy to determine via numer-
ical examples that the model implies tomahawk-type dynamics. Given
that hint, it is usually possible to develop analytical expressions for
the break point and the sustain point, expressions that invariably have
straightforward economic interpretations.

Notes

1. In this book we pay relatively little attention to one important strand of analysis,
largely inspired by the classic analyses of Weber (1909) and especially Hotelling (1929),
that focuses on the strategic interactions between firms’ location decisions. In essence
one may say that Hotelling-type analyses treat the geographical distribution of demand
and resources as exogenous and carefully analyze the strategic interactions of firms,
whereas the models in this book use Dixit-Stiglitz to sterilize the strategic issues while
carefully analyzing the implications of endogenous location of demand and resources.
For a survey of location theory, see Beckmann and Thisse 1986.
2. The reason for this name will become apparent from figures in later chapters, for
example, figure 7.6. Technically, both these bifurcations are pitchforks, the first case
( B < 0) being a supercritical pitchfork, and the second ( B > 0), a subcritical pitchfork.
Grandmont 1988 contains a technical development of bifurcation theory.
This page intentionally left blank
Labor Mobility and
Regional Development
This page intentionally left blank
4                                        The Dixit-Stiglitz Model
                                         of Monopolistic
                                         Competition and Its
                                         Spatial Implications




In any model in which increasing returns play a crucial role, one must
somehow handle the problem of market structure. Traditional urban
models deal with the issue by assuming that increasing returns are
purely external to firms, allowing the modeler to continue to assume
perfect competition. The approach taken in this book, however, avoids
any direct assumption of external economies: Externalities emerge as
a consequence of market interactions involving economies of scale at
the level of the individual firm. Thus we must somehow model an
imperfectly competitive market structure. The workhorse model of this
kind is, of course, the Dixit-Stiglitz model of monopolistic competition
(Dixit and Stiglitz 1977). Dixit-Stiglitz monopolistic competition is
grossly unrealistic, but it is tractable and flexible; as we will see, it leads
to a very special but very suggestive set of results.
   This chapter develops a spatial version of the Dixit-Stiglitz model,
that is, one with multiple locations and transport costs between those
locations. This spatial Dixit-Stiglitz model is a crucial ingredient in al-
most everything that follows.
   We consider an economy with two sectors, agriculture and manufac-
turing. The agricultural sector is perfectly competitive and produces a
single, homogeneous good, whereas the manufacturing sector pro-
vides a large variety of differentiated goods. Of course, the label “agri-
culture” need not always be interpreted literally; the sector’s defining
characteristic is that it is the ”residual,” perfectly competitive sector
that is the counterpart to the action taking place in the increasing-
returns, imperfectly competitive manufacturing sector.
  We imagine that there are a very large number of potential manufac-
tured goods, so many that the product space can be represented as
continuous, enabling us to sidestep integer constraints on the number
of goods. Although each consumption and production activity takes
46                                                               Chapter 4


place at a specific location, first we describe each type of activity with-
out explicitly referring to the location.

4.1 Consumer Behavior

Every consumer shares the same Cobb-Douglas tastes for the two types
of goods:


where M represents a composite index of the consumption of manu-
factured goods, A is the consumption of the agricultural good, and p
is a constant representing the expenditure share of manufactured
goods. The quantity index, M, is a subutility function defined over
a continuum of varieties of manufactured goods; m (i ) denotes the
consumption of each available variety; and n is the range of varie-
ties produced, often called the ”number” of available varieties. We
assume that M is defined by a constant-elasticity-of-substitution (CES)
function:

M =   [I:    m(i)Pdi]’”, 0 < p < 1.

In this specification, the parameter p represents the intensity of the
preference for variety in manufactured goods. When p is close to 1,
differentiated goods are nearly perfect substitutes for each other; as p
decreases toward 0, the desire to consume a greater variety of manufac-
tured goods increases. If we set (T 3 1/ (1 - p), then (T represents the
elasticity of substitution between any two varieties.
    Given income Y and a set of prices, p A for the agricultural good and
p ( i ) for each manufactured good, the consumer’s problem is to max-
imize utility (4.1) subject to the budget constraint,

            l0”
~ A +A p(i)rn(i)di = Y.

This problem can be solved in two steps.’ First, whatever the value of
the manufacturing composite, M, each m ( i ) needs to be chosen so as
to minimize the cost of attaining M. This means solving the following
minimization problem:
The Dixit-Stiglitz Model and Its Spatial Implications                      47


The first-order condition to this expenditure minimization problem               .
gives equality of marginal rates of substitution to price ratios,




for any pair i, j that leads to m(i) = m(j)(p(j)/p(j))l/(l-P).Substituting
this equation into the original constraint,




and bringing the common term, m(j)p(j)l/('-p),
                                            outside the integral, we
have that




This is simply the compensated demand function for the jth variety of
manufacturing product.
  We can also derive an expression for the minimum cost of attaining
M. Expenditure on the jth variety is p ( j ) m ( j ) ,so using (4.5) and inte-
grating over all j gives




It is now natural to define the term multiplying M on the right-hand
side of this expression as a price index, so that the price index times
the quantity composite is equal to expenditure. Denoting this price in-
dex for manufactured products by G we have

GE   [I:                                  [
         ~ ( j ) ~ / ( ~ - l ) ~ i J ' p=- l ' ' p p (i)'-Odi J1'(l-o)   (4.7)

where p (o - l ) / o or o = 1/ (1 - p). The price index, G, measures
the minimum cost of purchasing a unit of the composite index M of
manufacturing goods, so just as M can be thought of as a utility func-
tion, G can be thought of as an expenditure function. Demand for m(i)
can now be written more compactly (using (4.7) in (4.5)) as
48                                                             Chapter 4


  The upper-level step of the consumer's problem is to divide total
income between agriculture and manufactures in aggregate, that is, to
choose A and M so as to

max U = MPAI-fl s.t. GM + p A A = Y,                                (4.9)
which yields the familiar results that M = pY/G and A = (1 - p)Y/pA.
Pulling the stages together, we obtain the following uncompensated
consumer demand functions. For agriculture,


and for each variety of manufactures

                                                                   (4.11)

Notice that, holding G constant, the price elasticity of demand for every
available variety is constant and equal to o.
  We can now express maximized utility as a function of income, the
price of agricultural output, and the manufactures' price index, giving
the indirect utility function
     = pP(1 - p)l-PyG-fl(pA)-(1-P).                                (4.12)
The term GP(y")('-p) is the cost-of-living index in the economy.
   So far this is a straightforward exercise in demand theory. What is
unusual in the Dixit-Stiglitz model-and plays a crucial role in our
analysis-is that the range of manufactures on offer becomes an endog-
enous variable. This means that it is important to understand the effects
on the consumer of changes in n, the number of varieties.
   Increasing the range of varieties on offer reduces the manufactures'
price index (because consumers value variety) and hence the cost of
attaining a given level of utility. This can be seen most clearly if we
assume that all manufactures are available at the same price, pa4'. Then
the price index, (4.7), simply becomes

G =    [I:   p(j)l-adj]
                          1 / (1-0)

                                      = yM,fl/(l-o).               (4.13)

The price index's responsiveness to the number of varieties depends
on the elasticity of substitution between varieties, 0,and we see that
the lower is o-the more differentiated are product varieties-the
greater is the reduction in the price index caused by an increase in the
The Dixit-Stiglitz Model and Its Spatial Implications                     49


number of varieties. The effect on welfare is then given by the indirect
utility function, (4.12).
   Changing the range of products available also shifts demand curves
for existing varieties. This can be seen by looking at the demand curve
for a single variety, equation (4.11). Because an increase in U reduces
G, it shifts each demand curve downward, This effect is important as
we come to determine the equilibrium number of varieties produced.
It says that as we increase the number of varieties, product market
competition intensifies, shifting demand curves for existing products
downward and reducing the sales of these varieties.

4.2 Multiple Locations and Transportation Costs

Depending on what we are trying to model, it is sometimes convenient
to think of the economy as consisting of a finite set of locations (regions
or countries), sometimes to think of it as spread across a continuous
space. For present purposes, however, it is sufficient to think in terms
of discrete locations, of which we suppose there are R. For the moment,
assume that each variety is produced in only one location and that all
varieties produced in a particular location are symmetric, having the
same technology and price. We denote the number of varieties pro-
duced in location Y by n,, and the mill or f.o.b. price of one of these
varieties by p y .
   Agricultural and manufactured goods can be shipped between 10-
cations and may incur transport costs in shipment. To avoid model-
ing a separate transportation industry, we assume the "iceberg"
form of transport costs introduced by von Thiinen and Paul Sam-
uelson.* Specifically, if a unit of the agricultural good [any variety of
manufactured goods] is shipped from a location Y to another location
s, only a fraction, 1/ T ; [1/ T t ] , of the original unit actually arrives;
the rest melts away en route. The constant T ; [TE] represents the
amount of the agricultural [manufactured] good dispatched per unit
received.
   The iceberg transport technology implies that if a manufacturing va-
riety produced at location Y is sold at price YJ?,then the delivered (c.i.f.)
price, ,r', of that variety at each consumi tion location s is given by

pE = p v g .                                                          (4.14)
  The manufacturing price index may take a different value in each
location; we denote this by writing the price index for location s as G,.
50                                                               Chapter 4


Iceberg transport costs together with the assumption that all varieties
produced in a particular location have the same price mean that, using
equation (4.7)) this price index can be written as

                                                                     (4.15)

Consumption demand in location s for a product produced in Y now
follows (from 4.11) as
                                                                     (4.16)
where Y, is income for location s. This gives consumption, but to sup-
ply this level of consumption, TF times this amount has to be
shipped. Summing across locations in which the product is sold, the
total sales of a single location Y variety, denoted, q y , therefore amount
to:
         R

q:' = p x Y,(pk'Tk') "G? IT?.                                        (4.17)
        5-1




This simply says that sales depend on income in each location, the price
index in each location, transport costs, and the mill price. Notice that
because the delivered prices of the same variety at all consumption
locations change proportionally to the mill price, and because each
consumer's demand for a variety has a constant price elasticity (T,
the elasticity of the aggregate demand for each variety with respect
to its mill price is also (T, regardless of the spatial distribution of
consumers.

4.3 Producer Behavior

Next we turn to the production side of the economy. The agricultural
good, we assume, is produced using a constant-returns technology un-
der conditions of perfect competition. Manufacturing, however, we as-
sume to involve economies of scale. These economies of scale arise at
the level of the variety; there are no economies of scope or of multiplant
operation. Technology is the same for all varieties and in all locations
and involves a fixed input of F and marginal input requirement cL1.
Thus, assuming for the moment that the only input is labor, the produc-
tion of a quantity q~''of any variety at any given location requires labor
input      given by
The Dixit-Stiglitz Model and Its Spatial Implications                   51



l M = F + cMqM.                                                     (4.18)
   Because of increasing returns to scale, consumers' preference for va-
riety, and the unlimited number of potential varieties of manufactured
goods, no firm will choose to produce the same variety supplied by
another firm. This means that each variety is produced in only one
location, by a single, specialized firm, so that the number of manu-
facturing firms in operation is the same as the number of available
varieties.

4.3.1   Profit Maximization

Next, consider a particular firm producing a specific variety at location
Y and facing a given wage rate, w?,for manufacturing workers there.
Then, with a mill price pfl, its profit is given by

7rr = p?q? - w!(F        + c"q?),                                   (4.19)

where q y is given by the demand function, (4.17).Each firm is assumed
to choose its price taking the price indices, G,, as given. The perceived
elasticity of demand is therefore o, so profit maximization implies that

pY(l - 1/o) = C'Wfl,
                                                                    (4.20)
        or pfl = cMw";"p,

for all varieties produced at Y.
  We suppose that there is free entry and exit in response to profits
or losses. Given the pricing rule, the profits of a firm at location Y are

                                                                    (4.21)

Therefore, the zero-profit condition implies that the equilibrium output
of any active firm is
q" = F(o - 1 ) / C M ,                                              (4.22)

and the associated equilibrium labor input is

I" = F + cM9* = Fo.                                                 (4.23)
Both q" and I* are constants common to every active firm in the econ-
omy. Therefore, if L y is the number of manufacturing workers at
52                                                                    Chapter 4


location r, and n, is the number of manufacturing firms (= the number
of the varieties produced) at r, then
n r = L;"/l" = L;"/Fo.                                                    (4.24)
   The results (4.20) and (4.22) are somewhat odd but play a crucial role
throughout our analysis. They say that the size ofthe market aflects neither
the viarkiip of price ouer marginal cost nor the scale at which individual goods
arc yrodiiced. As a result, a11 scale eflects work through changes in the variety
ofgoods azlailable. Obviously this is a rather strange result: Normally we
think both that larger markets mean more intensive competition, and
that one of the ways the economy takes advantage of the extent of the
market is by producing at larger scale. The Dixit-Stiglitz model says,
however, that all market-size effects work through changes in variety.
   This result is an artifact of the constant-elasticity demand functions,
together with the nonstrategic behavior implied by our assumption
that firms take the price indices, G,, to be constant as they solve their
profit maximization problem. If we were to relax the assumption of
nonstrategic behavior, each firm would then recognize that its choice
changes the price index, and this recognition of market power would
tend to reduce the firm's output and increase its price-cost margin. If
we adopt a specific form of oligopolistic interaction, such as Cournot
or Bertrand competition, then we can derive explicit expressions for
the pricing rule, and in both these cases the price-cost margin is a de-
creasing function of each firm's market share.? Under these assump-
tions an increase in market size has a procompetitive effect. It causes
entry of firms, which reduces price-cost margins and means that firms
must operate at larger scale (and lower average cost) to break even.
We have already seen (section 4.1) how variety effects create a negative
relationship between market size and the price index; the procompeti-
tive effect is a second force operating in the same direction.
   Throughout our analysis, however, we choose to ignore this second
effect. Having constant price-cost markups and firm scale is a dramatic
simplification, allowing us to model cleanly issues that might other-
wise seem quite intractable.

4.3.2   The Manufacturing Wage Equation

We have seen that the condition that firms make no profits is equivalent
to the condition that they produce q". Using the demand functions,
The Dixit-Stiglitz Model and Its Spatial Implications                    53


(4.17), firms at location Y attain this level of output if the following
equation is satisfied:

                                                                     (4.25)

We can turn this equation around and say that active firms break even
if and only if the price they charge satisfies
             R

                                                                     (4.26)

Using the pricing rule (4.20) this can be expressed as


                                                                     (4.27)

 We refer to this as the wage equation and use it often. It gives the manu-
 facturing wage at which firms in each location break even, given the
 income levels and price indices in all locations and the costs of shipping
into these locations. As can be seen, this wage is higher the higher are
incomes in the firms' markets, Y,, the better is the firm's access to these
markets (lower T:), and the less competition the firm faces in these
markets. (Recall that the price index is decreasing in the number of
varieties sold.)
   Two important observations need to be made about the wage equa-
tion. First, we assume that active firms alzuays make no profits, so
that this equation gives the actual manufacturing wage in any loca-
tion that has a nonzero number of firms. In the long run, this wage
equals the supply price of labor to manufacturing but in the short
run may differ from it. Any such difference gives rise to adjustment
dynamics, which are spelled out in later chapters. Essentially then,
we are assuming that the entry and exit of firms occurs very fast-
so profits are always 0-but relocation of workers among sectors or
locations occurs more slowly, with a dynamic that we will model
explicitly.
   Second, the manufacturing wage as given by (4.27) is defined even
in locations that have no manufacturing. It then measures the maxi-
mum wage that could be paid by a firm considering production in the
location.
54                                                             Chapter 4


4.3.3    Real Wages

Real income at each location is proportional to nominal income de-
flated by the cost-of-living index, GF(p:')'-F. This means that the real
wage of manufacturing workers in location, r denoted coy, is



4.4     Some Normalizations

The manufacturing price index and the wage equation pop up fre-
quently in this book. Happily, we can simplify them if we choose units
of measurement appropriately. First, notice that we are free to choose
units of measurement for output-be it units, tens of units, kilos, or
tons. We choose units such that the marginal labor requirement satis-
fies the following equation:

                                                                   (4.29)

This normalization means that the pricing equation, (4.20), be-
comes

pr" = .ruy                                                         (4.30)
and also that q" = I".
  Second, as we have seen, the number of firms is simply an interval
of the real line, [0, rz], and without loss of generality, we can choose
units of measurement for this range. For sections I1 and I11 of this book
we choose convenient units by setting the fixed input requirement F
to satisfy the following equation:
F = p/0.                                                           (4.31)
The number of firms in each location is related to the size of the manu-
facturing labor force in the location according to equation (4.24),which
becomes
U , = L?/p.                                                        (4.32)
These choices of units also set firm scale. The output level at which
firms make no profit (equation (4.22))becomes
q" = 1" =                                                          (4.33)
The Dixit-Stiglitz Model and Its Spatial Implications                   55


  Using these normalizations the price index and wage equation can
now be written in a more convenient form. The price index becomes



                                                                     (4.34)




The wage equation becomes



                                                                     (4.35)




We use these two equations repeatedly, both to characterize equilibrium
and to investigate its stability. Essentially we have chosen units in a way
that shifts attention from the number of manufacturing firms and prod-
uct prices to the number of manufacturing workers and their wage rates.

4.5 The Price Index Effect and the Home Market Effect

The price indices and wage equations (4.34) and (4.35) do not define
a full economic model, but they nevertheless imply some of the most
important relationships that drive the results that follow, and it is
worth examining them in some detail to draw out these relationships.
  Consider a two-location version of these equations. Writing the
equations out in full, we have the price indices, (4.34),
          1
G;-'    1 - [ L ~ z o ~ - "+ L ~ ( w ~ T ) ~ - ' ] ,
          c1
                                                                     (4.36)
       1
Gi-0 = - [ L , (201T ) 1 - O + L,W:-"],
       CL
and the wage equations, (4.35),
ZU? = YIGY-'       + Y2G;-'T1-',
                                                                     (4.37)
ZO;    = YIGIJ-'T1-"     + Y2G;-',
56                                                               Chapter 4


where we have dropped the superscripts M, because we are looking
only at manufacturing, and have denoted transport costs between loca-
tions by the single number T, and assumed, as we do throughout, that
no transport costs are incurred within each location. These pairs of
equations are symmetric, and so have a symmetric solution: That is, if
L I = L2 and Y,= Yz,then there is a solution with G , = G 2 and 7 0 1 =
w2. By inspection, it is easy to see that these symmetric equilibrium
values satisfy the following relationships,
                     I 0              1 0

1 + TI-0 = P ( 6 )         =   "'(6)                                 (4.38)
            L   70             Y 7u

where absence of subscripts denotes that these are symmetric equilib-
rium values.
   We can explore the relationships contained in the price indices and
wage equations by linearizing them around the symmetric equilib-
rium. Around this point an increase in a variable in one location is
always associated with a change, of opposite sign but of equal absolute
magnitude, in the corresponding variable in the other country. So let-
ting dG = dGl = -dGz, and so on, we derive, by differentiating the
price indices and wage equations respectively,


                                                                     (4.39)



                                                                     (4.40)


   From the first equation, we can see the direct effect of a change in the
location of manufacturing on the price index of manufactured goods.
Suppose that the supply of labor to manufacturing is perfectly elastic,
so that d70 = 0. Bearing in mind that 1 - 0 < 0 and T > 1, equation
(4.39) implies that a change dL/L in manufacturing employment has a
negative effect on the price index, dG/G. We call this the price itidex
@?cf. It means that the location with a larger manufacturing sector also
has a lower price index for manufactured goods, simply because a
smaller proportion of this region's manufacturing consumption bears
transport costs.
   Next, let us consider how relative demand affects the location of
manufacturing. It is convenient to define a new variable, Z,
The Dixit-Stiglitz Model and Its Spatial Implications                   57



                                                                     (4.41)

which is a sort of index of trade cost, with values between 0 and 1. If
trade is perfectly costless, T = 1, then 2 takes the value 0; if trade is
impossible, it takes value 1. Using the definition of Z and eliminating
dG/G from equations (4.39) and (4.40) gives
r               1

 2 + Z ( 1 - 0) dzu  dL dY
                - + 2- = -.                                          (4.42)
                 l w        L     Y
 We learn a number of things from this equation.
   First, suppose that our wider economic model gives us a perfectly
elastic supply of labor to manufacturing, so drip = 0. We then have a
relationship known as the home market efect. A 1 percent change in
demand for manufactures (dY/Y) causes a 1/ Z (> 1) percent change
in the employment in, and hence production of, manufactures, dL/L.
That is, other things being equal, the location with the larger home
market has a more than proportionately larger manufacturing sector,
and therefore also exports manufactured goods.‘
   Second, although we have just derived the home market effect for
the case when labor supply is perfectly elastic, this need not be the
case; if the labor supply curve slopes upward, some of the home mar-
ket advantage is taken out in higher wages rather than exports. Thus,
locations with a higher demand for manufactures may pay a highcr rzoniiiial
wage .
   But notice that we have already seen that an increase in L is, other
things being the same, associated with a decrease in G. So if Y is high
in some region, we may expect the real wage to be high both because
the nominal wage is high and because the price index is low. Hence
locations with a higher demand for manufactures tend, other thiiigs bciiig
equal, to ofer a higher real wage to manufacturirig iuovkers.
  Of course other things need not be equal, but we have just sketched
out several of the key elements of the cumulative causation that, in our
models, tends to lead to agglomeration. Areas with large manufactur-
ing sectors tend to have low price indexes for manufactures, because
of the price index effect; areas with large demand for manufactures
tend to have disproportionately large manufacturing sectors, because
of the home market effect. If we fill in just one more relationship-
that manufacturing workers themselves demand manufactures, so that
locations with large concentrations of manufacturing also tend to have
58                                                                Chapter 4


large demand for manufactured goods-we           are almost there. But let
us spell out the details in chapter 5.

4.6   The "No-Black-Hole" Condition

We have seen that increasing the size of the manufacturing sector tends
to raise real income. However, we often want to put an upper bound
on the strength of this effect. The condition we use is best explained
by looking at a closed economy: a situation where Z = 1.
  Consider the real income of a manufacturing worker, (4.28).Suppose
that the price of agricultural output is constant, and totally differentiate
this to give

_ _-
do _ -d-w     dG
             Pc'                                                      (4.43)
0      zu

where we have once again dropped the superscripts M and, because




                               +
we are looking at a single economy, also the location subscripts. Now
using (4.39) and (4.40) with Z = 1, we obtain

do
 o                      -1
                                                                      (4.44)



which says the following: Suppose that we add more workers to the
manufacturing sector of a closed economy, holding expenditure on the
industry constant (dY = 0) and hence holding constant the nominal
income generated. What effect does this have on real wages of workers
in the sector? Clearly, because expenditure on manufactures is held
constant, so is the wage bill, implying that an increase in L reduces the
wage zu equiproportionately. However, the increase in manufacturing
employment increases the number of varieties of manufacturing prod-
ucts, thus reducing G and tending to raise real income. This latter effect
can conceivably outweigh the former, so that an increase in the number
of workers would actually raise their real wage.
  We in general are not interested in economies in which increasing
returns are that strong, if only because, as we will see, in such econo-
mies the forces working toward agglomeration always prevail, and the
economy tends to collapse into a point. To avoid such "black-hole loca-
The Dixit-Stiglitz Model and Its Spatial Implications                                 59


tion" theory, we usually impose what we call the assumption of no black
holes:

                                                                                  (4.45)

  We now have the building blocks of our approach and are ready to
start examining some geography.

Notes

1. A two-stage budgeting proceduring is applicable because preferences are separable
between agriculture and manufactures and M, the subutility function for manufactures,
is homothetic in the quantities m(i). See Deaton and Muellbauer (1980) for discussion
of conditions under which two-stage budgeting is appropriate.
2. The "iceberg" transport technology was formally introduced by Samuelson (1952).
Von Thiinen, however, supposed the cost of grain transportation to consist largely of
the grain consumed on the way by the horses pulling the wagon (von Thiinen, 1826,
chap. 4). Hence, the von Thiinen model may be considered as the predecessor of the
"iceberg" transport technology.
3. See Smith and Venables 1988 for derivation of these expressions.
4. The home market effect should apply whether or not a cumulative process of agglom-
eration is at work. Indeed, Krugman 1980, which originally introduced the effect, did
so in the context of a model in which relative market sizes were purely exogenous. Recent
work by Davis and Weinstein (1997) has attempted to measure the empirical importance
of the home market effect in patterns of international trade and has found surprisingly
strong impacts.
5. Because 0 5 Z 5 1, the coefficient on dw/w is positive.
This page intentionally left blank
5                                     Core and Periphery




In the last chapter we laid out some basic machinery for modeling a
monopolistically competitive economy-in essence, a set of technical
tricks that allow us to handle the problems of market structure posed
by the assumption that there are increasing returns at the level of the
individual firm. We are now in a position to use that machinery to
develop our first model of economic geography.
   The analysis we introduce here is not intended to be realistic.
Aside from the basic artificiality of the Dixit-Stiglitz model of mono-
polistic competition (an artificiality that is, alas, a necessary part of
nearly all the models in this book), in this chapter we make a number
of additional unrealistic assumptions that we drop or modify in later
chapters. Our purpose here is to show, as clearly and simply as pos-
sible, how the interactions among increasing returns at the level of
the firm, transport costs, and factor mobility can cause spatial eco-
nomic structure to emerge and change. Some of the conclusions from
this first pass turn out to be sensitive to those assumptions, but let us
postpone that discussion until later. For now, let us simply get into the
model.

5.1 Assumptions

We consider an economy of the type set out in chapter 4. It has two
sectors, monopolistically competitive manufacturing M and perfectly
competitive agriculture A . Each of these sectors employs a single re-
source, workers and farmers respectively, and we assume that each of
these sector-specific factors is in fixed supply.
  The geographical distribution of resources is partly exogenous,
partly endogenous. Let there be R regions. The world has LAfarmers,
and each region is endowed with an exogenous share of this world
62                                                               Chapter 5


agricultural labor force denoted 4,. The manufacturing labor force, by
contrast, is mobile over time; at any point in time we denote the share
of region r in the world worker supply LM by hr. It is convenient to
choose units’s0 that LM = p, LA = 1 - p.
   Transport costs among regions take a very special form. Manufac-
tured goods are subject to iceberg transport costs of the form intro-
duced in chapter 4; if one unit of a good is shipped from r to s, only
1/Trs units arrive. Shipment of agricultural goods, by contrast, is as-
sumed costless. This is a very unrealistic assumption: In the real world,
the cost of transporting one dollar’s worth of raw materials is normally
higher than that of transporting a dollar’s worth of manufactured
goods! However, assuming costless transport of food makes our life
much simpler for the moment; we turn to the consequences of drop-
ping that assumption in chapter 7.
   Because agricultural goods can be freely transported, and because
these goods are produced with constant returns, agricultural workers
have the same wage rate in all regions. We use this wage rate as the
numeraire, so zut= 1.Wages of manufacturing workers, however, may
differ both in nominal and in real terms. Let us define zu, and w, to be
the nominal and real wage rate, respectively, of manufacturing work-
ers in region r.
   What determines how workers move between regions? Rather than
try to produce a sophisticated theory of dynamics, we simply assume
that they move toward regions that offer high real wages and away
from regions that offer below-average real wages. Specifically, we de-
fine the average real wage as

o=   1hror
      r
                                                                      (5.1)

and assume the ad hoc dynamics*


(Notice that the extra h, is necessary to ensure that the changes in all
region’s shares sum to 0.)
   In our model, then, the distribution of manufacturing across regions
is given at any point in time but evolves over time to the extent that real
wages differ across regions. Regional real wages, however, themselves
depend on the distribution of manufacturing, so we turn next to that
dependence.
Core and Periphery                                                    63


5.2 Instantaneous Equilibrium

There are a number of different ways to describe the determination of
equilibrium at a point in time. We find it most useful to think of that
equilibrium as the simultaneous solution of 4R equations, which deter-
mine the income of each region, the price index of manufactures con-
sumed in that region, the wage rate of workers in that region, and the
real wage rate in that region.

5.2.1 Income

The income equation is simple. Because transportation of agricultural
goods is costless, agricultural workers earn the same wage everywhere,
equal to 1 because it is the numeraire. Recalling that we have chosen
units so that there are p manufacturing workers and 1 - p agricultural
workers in total, the income of region Y is



5.2.2   Price Index

The second ingredient is the price index of manufactures in each loca-
tion, which is as constructed in chapter 4 and given in equation (4.34).
Because the number of manufacturing workers in location s is LM =
pLhs,the price index becomes

Gr =    [C                I*
             ~s(zlJsTsr)l-o
                              l/l-u

                                                                   (5.4)

Equation (5.4) exhibits the price index effect that we saw in chapter 4.
Suppose that wages in different regions were the same. Then it is ap-
parent from looking at the equation that the price index in Y would
tend to be lower, the higher the share of manufacturing that is in re-
gions with low transport costs to Y. In particular, were there only two
regions, a shift of manufacturing into one of the regions would tend,
other things equal, to lower the price index in that region-and thus
make the region a more attractive place for manufacturing workers to
be. This is a version of the forward linkages that we discussed briefly
in chapter 3, and turns out to be one of the forces that may lead to
emergence of geographical structure in the economy.
64                                                             Chapter 5


5.2.3 Nominal Wages

As we saw in chapter 4, it is possible to derive the level of wages at
which manufacturing in region Y breaks even. This wage equation is
given by equation (4.35), which we restate as,




Like the equation for the price index, this equation is worth looking at
for a moment. Suppose that the price indexes in all regions were simi-
lar. Then (5.5) would say that the nominal wage rate in region Y tends
to be higher if incomes in other regions with low transport costs from
Y are high. The reason, of course, is that firms can afford to pay higher
wages if they have good access to a larger market. Thus our model
exhibits a form of the backward linkages that drove the base-multiplier
model sketched out in chapter 3; these reinforce the forward linkages
described above.

5.2.4 Real Wages

Finally, it is straightforward to define the real wages of workers: Be-
cause manufactured goods receive a share p of their expenditure, we
have


The nominal wage is deflated by the cost-of-living index, as in (4.28),
but with the price of agriculture equal to unity everywhere.

5.2.5 Determination of Equilibrium

This model’s instantaneous equilibrium can be thought of as deter-
mined by the simultaneous solution of the equations for income (5.3),
the equations for price indices (5.4), the wage equations (5.5), and the
real-wage equations (5.6): 4R equations in all.3 Obviously we cannot
say much about the solution of these equations in the general case. We
can, however, get considerable insight by examining an obvious special
case: that of a two-region economy in which agriculture is evenly di-
vided between regions. In that special case, the obvious question is
whether manufacturing is equally divided between the two regions
or concentrated in one region: that is, whether the economy becomes
Core and Periphery                                                     65


divided between a manufacturing "core" and an agricultural "periph-
ery." This special case has therefore come to be known as the core-
periphery model; let us see how it works.

5.3 The Core-Periphery Model: Statement and Numerical Examples

The core-periphery model is the special case of the model described
above when there are only two regions and agriculture is evenly
divided between those two regions. This means that we need not
explicitly write out shares of agriculture, because they are both I/?;
and we can also simplify notation slightly by letting T be the trans-
port cost between the two regions and letting an unsubscripted h rep-
resent region 1's share of manufacturing (with 1 - h representing
region 2's share). Thus there are eight equations for instantaneous
equilibrium:




y2 =   p ( l - h)7u, + 1 - P
                          2 ,
                      ~




                                                                    (5.9)
                                                                   (5.10)
                                                                   (5.11)




and


  This model still does not look particularly tractable: eight simul-
taneous nonlinear equations! We will see shortly, however, that
the core-periphery model does indeed yield clear analytical results
to the determined economist. However, to know what kind of re-
sults to look for, it is very helpful to look first at some numerical
examples.
  Figures 5.1,5.2, and 5.3 plot ci)' - m2, the difference between the two
regions' real wage rates in manufacturing, against h, the region 1 share
66                                                                    Chapter 5


          0 2




          0




                0.0                0.5                          1.o
                                                           A.
Figure 5.1
Real wage differentials, T = 2.1


of manufacturing. All three figures are calculated for (T = 5, p = 0.4.
However, the transport cost T is different in each: Figure 5.1 shows a
high transport cost case, T = 2.1, figure 5.2 a low case, T = 1.5, and
figure 5.3 an intermediate case, T = 1.7.
   In figure 5.1, the wage differential is positive if h is less than V 2 , nega-
tive if h is greater than l/2. This means that if a region has more than


0 1   -




                0.0                0.5                          1.o
                                                            h
Figure 5.2
Real wage differentials, T = 1.5
Core and Periphery                                                      67



0 1   -




          0.0                      0.5                    1.o
                                                      A
Figure 5.3
Real wage differentials, T = 1.7


half the manufacturing labor force, it is less attractive to workers than
the other region. Clearly, in this case the economy converges to a long-
run symmetric equilibrium in which manufacturing is equally divided
between the two regions.
   In figure 5.2, by contrast, the wage differential slopes strictly up-
ward in h: The higher the share of manufacturing in either region,
the more attractive the region becomes. This upward slope results,
of course, from the two linkage effects discussed in section 5.2:
Other things equal, a larger manufacturing labor force makes a re-
gion more attractive both because the larger local market leads to
higher nominal wages (backward linkage) and because the larger
variety of locally produced goods lowers the price index (forward
linkage). The important point here is that although an equal divi-
sion of manufacturing between the two regions is still an equilib-
rium, it is now unstable: If one region should have even a slightly
larger manufacturing sector, that sector would tend to grow over time
while the other region’s manufacturing shrank, leading eventually to
a core-periphery pattern with all manufacturing concentrated in one
region.
   Finally, figure 5.3, for an intermediate level of transport costs, shows
a more complicated picture. The symmetric equilibrium is now locally
stable, as in figure 5.1. However, two unstable equilibria now flank it:
If h starts from either a sufficiently high or a sufficiently low initial
68                                                                Chapter 5




Figure 5.4
Core-periphery bifurcation


value, the economy converges not to the symmetric equilibrium but to
a core-periphery pattern with all manufacturing in only one region.
This picture then has five equilibria: three stable (the symmetric equi-
librium and manufacturing concentration in either region) and two
unstable.
   From these three cases it is straightforward to understand figure 5.4,
which shows how the types of equilibria vary with transport costs. As
in figure 3.1, solid lines indicate stable equilibria, broken lines unstable.
At sufficiently high transport costs, there is a unique stable equilibrium
in which manufacturing is evenly divided between the regions. When
transport costs fall below some critical level, new stable equilibria
emerge in which all manufacturing is concentrated in one region.
When they fall below a second critical level, the symmetric equilibrium
becomes unstable.
   The similarities to the base-multiplier model are clear. In particular,
there are two critical points. The sustain point (labeled as point T ( S )
in figure 5.4) is the point at which a core-periphery pattern, once estab-
lished, can be sustained. And the break point T ( B )is the point at which
symmetry between the regions must be broken because the symmetric
equilibrium is unstable.
   We can also now see how to approach the model analytically. We
want to determine the conditions under which a core-periphery pattern
is possible-the sustain point-and the conditions under which it is
necessary-the break point.
Core and Periphery                                                        69


5.4 When Is a Core-Periphery Pattern Sustainable?

Suppose we start with all manufacturing concentrated in one region,
say region 1. To determine whether this is an equilibrium, we ask
whether a small group of workers moving from region 1 to region 2
would receive a higher real wage than that received by the workers
remaining behind. If so, a core-periphery geography is not an equilib-
rium: Manufacturing will shift over time to the peripheral region. If
not, a core-periphery pattern is an equilibrium: The concentration of
manufacturing will be self-sustaining.
   In short, to assess whether a core-periphery pattern is sustainable,
we need to posit a situation in which h = 1 and ask whether in that
case o1is greater or less than 02. If o12 oz,then the core-periphery
pattern is sustainable, because manufacturing workers will not move
out of region 1.4
  Suppose we set h = 1. Simply guess that zu l = 1; in that case

                                                                      (5.15)

and we can then confirm from (5.11)that w1= 1is indeed an equilibrium
value. Notice that income is higher in location 1 than in location 2: It has
all the income generated by manufacturing employment. And notice also
that the price index is higher in 2 than in 1, because location 2 has to
import all its manufactures. These two facts are the basis of the backward
and forward linkages that support the core-periphery pattern.
   Because zul = 1 and G1 = 1, it then follows that o1= 1 as well. So
all we need to do is determine o2and see whether it is more or less
than 1. Substituting into the nominal and real wage equations, (5.12)
and (5.14), we have

                                                                     (5.16)

   Equation (5.16) looks complex but lends itself immediately to inter-
pretation in terms of forward and backward linkages. The first term
in the equation, T P , represents the forward linkage: It comes from the
fact that the price index in region 2 is T times as high as that in region
1 because manufactured goods must be imported. The term is less than
unity: Having to import manufactures makes location 2 relatively ex-
pensive, and therefore unattractive, as a place for manufacturing work-
ers to locate.
70                                                                Chapter 5


   The second term represents the nominal wage at which a firm locat-
ing in 2 would break even. The income ievel h location 1 is weighted
by T1-(', which is less than unity; this weighting is a result of the trans-
port costdisadvantage that a firm in 2 would face in supplying location
1.Tk?e income level in 2 is symmetrically weighted by TU-l,greater than
unity, because of the transport cost disadvantage that firms in 1 bear
in supplying location 2. Although these effects are symmetric, they
mean that a firm considering locating in 2 does well in the smaller
market but badly in the larger; hence there is a backward linkage via
demand from the concentration of production to the nominal wage rate
firms can afford to pay.
   What does equation (5.16) tell us about the sustainability of the core-
periphery structure? First, consider the role of transportation costs. To
do this it is helpful to rewrite (5.26), in the form

                                                                      (5.17)

Clearly,when T = 1 (no transport costsj, o2= 1: Location is irrelevant.
If we consider a small-transport cost increase from that point, we
find (by totally differentiating (5.17) and evaluating the derivative at
T = 1 , 0 1 2 = 1)

                                                                      (5.18)

At small levels of transport costs agglomeration must therefore be sus-
tainable, because o2< 1 = wl.
   Suppose, on the other hand, that we consider very large T. The first
term in (5.17)clearly becomes arbitrarily small. There are two possibili-
ties for the second term. If (CJ - 1) - ~ C <J 0, then this term also becomes
arbitrari!y small, so m2 tends to 0. But recall that (CJ - l ) / o > p is the
no-black-hole condition we discussed in chapter 4. It is now clear
how to interpret this alternative case: if (CJ - l ) / o < p, the agglom-
eration forces are so strong that a core-periphery pattern is always an
equilibrium.
   If the no-black-hole condition holds, so (0- 1) - ~ C J> 0, then the
second term in (5.17) becomes arbitrary large. Figure 5.5 shows what
happens in this case. The curve defining o2as a function of T dopes
downward in the vicinity of T = 1, but then turns upward. The point
where it crosses 1 defines the sustain value of T Below this value the
core-periphery pattern is an equilibrium, and above it, it is not.
Core and Periphery                                                      71




      1.o                  1.5                     T

Figure 5.5
Sustain point


   How does this sustain value of T depend on parameters? A lower
value of 0 (and p) stretches the curve in figure 5.5 to the right, raising
the range of values of T at which the core-periphery structure is sus-
tainable. Conversely, as 0 (and p) get very large, the sustain value of
T becomes close to unity, because very small transport costs then choke
off trade, so that manufacturing must operate in both locations to sup-
ply local demand.
   It is also easy to see that the likelihood that o2< 1, so that a core-
periphery equilibrium exists, depends on a sufficiently large role of
manufacturing in the economy. Suppose that p = 0, so (5.16) reduces
to [(TI-" + T'-1)/2]1/a. Providing T > 1, this is always greater than 1,
so there cannot be a core-periphery pattern. More generally, at lower
values of p the curve in figure 5.5 is rotated upward, reducing the range
of values of T that sustain the core-periphery geography. When the
manufacturing sector is large, and so can generate significant forward
linkages via supply and backward linkages via demand, it generates
sufficient centripetal forces to sustain a concentrated equilibrium over
a wide range of transportation costs.

5.5     When Is the Symmetric Equilibrium Broken?

We saw from figures 5.1-5.4 that the symmetric equilibrium is stable
for high enough values of transport costs but becomes unstable at low
values. The figures also illustrate how we can go about finding this
72                                                             Chapter 5


break point: It occurs when the model's parameters are such that the
o1- m2 curve is horizontal at the symmetric equilibrium. To find it,
we have to differentiate totally the equilibrium-characterized by
equations (5.7)-(5.14)-with respect to h, and hence find the equilib-
rium response d ( m , - 0 2 ) / d h .
  This task is not as formidable as it sounds, because we differentiate
around the symmetric equilibrium (as we did in section 4.5). At this
equilibrium we know the values of all the endogenous variables of the
model. They are

                                                                  (5.19)



These can be checked by recalling that h = l/2 is the definition of the
symmetric equilibrium, and then seeing that equations (5.7)-(5.12) are
satisfied at these values. In the subsequent discussion, we write the
values of variables at the symmetric equilibrium as G, Y, etc., dropping
the location subscript.
  The fact that we are differentiating around the symmetric equil-
ibrium brings another simplification. Any change in an endogenous
variable in region 1 is matched by an equal but opposite sign change
in the corresponding variables in region 2. This means that we do
not have to keep track of region 1 and region 2 variables separately.
Instead we write dY = dY, = -dY2, and similarly for changes in other
variables.
  To see how this works, consider the total derivative of the income
equations, (5.7) and (5.8).These are


but around the symmetric equilibrium, these can be described by the
single equation,

dY = F d h + CI
             -dw.                                                 (5.21)
             2
Proceeding analogously, the total differential of the price indices (5.9)
and (5.10) is
         dG
(1 - CT) __ = G'-'(l
          G
                       - T' ")
                                               I-
                                    (1 - C T ) ~ W
                                        2
                                                                  (5.22)
Core and Periphery                                                      73


The term 1 - T1-O appears repeatedly because it captures the effects
of an increase in a variable in one region and corresponding decrease
in the other. We can simplify by defining a variable Z,

Z = [l - P O ] -
               -
                 [l - T I - O ]
                                                                    (5.23)
    [l + Tl-7      2GlpU
where the second equation comes from the value of G at the symmetric
equilibrium, (5.19).We have already seen Z in chapter 4. It is an index
of trade barriers, taking value 0 when there are no transport costs
(T = 1) and 1 when transport costs are prohibitive (T -+CO). Using this
expression, (5.22) becomes

dG - 2z dh + Zdw.                                                   (5.24)
 G  1-0
Applying the same techniques, the total differential of the wage equa-
tions (5.11) and (5.12) and real wage equations (5.13) and (5.14) are

O ~ Z U= 2ZdY   + (0- 1)Z dG
                          -,
                           G
                                                                    (5.25)

                  dG
G p d ~= dw -     -.                                                (5.26)
                   G
  We want to find d o / d h , and we can do so by eliminating dG/G, dw,
and dY from equations (5.21), (5.24), (5.25) and (5.26). This is a long
but straightforward set of substitutions, details of which are given in
the appendix. The required expression giving the change in real wages
caused by a movement of workers is

                                                                    (5.27)

where we have replaced 0 by p, p = (O - 1)/0. (The expression is
slightly more compact this way.) The symmetric equilibrium is stable
if d o / d h is negative and unstable if it is positive. We can see easily
that the denominator is positive, because Z lies in the interval 0 (free
trade) to 1 (autarky) and both p and p are less than unity. The sign of
the expression therefore depends on the numerator of the term in
square brackets. When Z is close to 0 (transport costs are low), this is
certainly positive, so the symmetric equilibrium is unstable. Increasing
Z reduces the size of the numerator, and when Z = 1 (so that transport
74                                                               Chapter 5




     I .o                  1.5                     T

Figure 5.6
Break point


costs are infinite), the numerator is positive if p < p, or changes sign
and becomes negative if p > p. This gives exactly the same two cases
as we saw in our discussion of the sustain point. The symmetric equilib-
rium is always unstable if the no-black-hole condition fails, p < p.
Otherwise, the symmetric equilibrium is stable at sufficiently high lev-
els of transport costs.
   Figure 5.6 gives d o / d h as a function of T, for the case in which the
no-black-hole condition holds, p > p. At free trade (T = 1, Z = 0) reloca-
tion of labor (dh)has no effect on the regional real wage differentials
(dco), essentially because with no transport costs the regions are not
economically distinct. At intermediate levels of T , the forward and
backward linkages associated with the relocation of workers raise the
real wage in the location to which workers are moving, so d o / d h > 0 and
the symmetric equilibrium is unstable. As T -+00 (autarky),an increase in
one region’s industrial labor force reduces the real wage there, because
it increases the supply of manufactures that cannot now be exported.
The break point is at point T ( B ) ,where d o / d h changes sign.
   We can use equation (5.27) to derive an explicit expression for the
break point value of T . Setting the numerator of the term in square
brackets equal to 0 and using the definition of Z , this expression is

                                                                    (5.28)
Core and Periphery                                                              75



Table 5.1
Critical values of T: Break points T(B) and sustain points T ( S )




G = 3 (p = 0.67)        1.67        1.72        3.05       4.47      8.72   3124.7
0 = 5 (p = 0.8)         1.26        1.27        1.63       1.81      2.30      5.00
G = 7 (p = 0.86)        1.158       1.164       1.36       1.44      1.68      2.44



The parameter values satisfying this equation define the break values
at which the symmetric equilibrium becomes unstable. What do we
know about these values? First, the break value of T is unique and, if
we maintain the the no-black-hole condition, it occurs at a positive level
of trade costs, T > 1. Second, the break value is increasing in p: The
larger the share of manufacturing workers in the economy, the greater
the range of T in which the symmetric equilibrium is unstable. It is
also decreasing in p (and therefore also o),a low p corresponding to
a high degree of product differentiation and large price cost markups,
and hence strong forward and backward linkages.
  The dependence of break and sustain points on parameters is most
easily summarized using some numerical examples. Each cell in table
5.1 reports first the break point and then the sustain point at dif-
ferent values of p and o. Because both critical values are increasing
in p and decreasing in 0,the range of transport costs in which the
core-periphery geography occurs is greater the larger is the share of
manufactures in the economy, and the larger are firms’ price cost
markups. Notice that the sustain point always occurs at a higher
value of T than does the break point, because the bifurcation is a
tomahawk, as illustrated in figure 5.4.

5.6 Implications and Conclusions

One could say that the dynamic spatial model laid out in this chapter-
and its two-region core-periphery version in particular-plays much
the same role in our approach to economic geography that the
2 X 2 X 2 model plays in constant-returns trade theory. That is, it is
a model simple enough to yield readily to analysis, yet enough is going
on in the model that it yields a number of suggestive and interesting
conclusions. From it we learn how economies of agglomeration can
76                                                              Chapter 5


emerge from the interactions among economies of scale at the level of
the individual producer, transport costs, and factor mobility. We also
get a clear illustration both of the tension between centripetal and cen-
trifugal forces and of the potential for discontinuous change that ten-
sion creates. Finally, we get a first view of the way that dynamic
analysis can serve as a powerful tool of simplification, allowing us
to sort through and in the end limit the possibilities static analysis
suggests.
   For all its virtues, however, the core-periphery model-like the
2 X 2 X 2 model in trade!-can be a bit too seductive: Some of its
implications turn out to be sensitive to assumptions one would not
want to defend. In the next two chapters we therefore push out the
model's boundaries, first by considering the implications of multiple
regions, then by turning to a more realistic structure of transport costs.

Appendix: Symmetry Breaking

We want to find the effect of a change dh on the symmetric equilibrium.
In the text we totally differentiated the equilibrium around the sym-
metric point and derived:

                                                                    (5.21)


       2z dh + Zdzv,
'IG - ___
.-
                                                                    (5.24)
 G    1-0




and




We use (5.21) to eliminate dY from (5.25), and then write (5.24) and
(5.25) as the system

                              2z dh
                             1-0
                                        I                          (5A.1)
                             2zp dh
                            -1-0
Core and Periphery                                                                       77


from which

                                                                                    (5A.2)

and

                                                                                    (5A.3)

with the determinant, A, taking the form
      Z*(1 - 0)- zp + 0.
A =                                                                                 (5A.4)
             1-0

Using these in the equation for do,(5.26), gives
                  ~(20- 1) - Z(o(1 + p2) - 1)
                                                                                    (5A.5)
d3L     0-1          0 - p z - Z2(0- 1)

Equation (5.27) of the text is derived by replacing 0 with 1/(1 - p)
and using the definition of Z, (5.23).

Notes

1. We can choose units in which to measure each of the two different types of labor, in
addition to the choice of units for output and for firms that we made in chapter 4.
2. Although we have no deep justification for this particular formulation, these dynamics
are equivalent to the “replicator dynamics” routinely used in evolutionary game theory.
Indeed, our model can, if one likes, be regarded as an evolutionary game. See Weibull
1995.
3. When we work with numerical examples, it is necessary to solve this system. Al-
though it is not necessarily the most efficient procedure, simple iteration generally works:
That is, start with guesses at w,,r = 1, . . . , R; calculate in sequence the implied Y and
G vectors; calculate new values of zo; and repeat until convergence.
4. We could of course pursue the symmetric case: set h = 0 and see if ol5 0:.
This page intentionally left blank
6                                      Many Regions and
                                       Continuous Space




Chapter 5 began by developing a model of location in an economy with
an arbitrary number of regions. When it came to studying that model,
however, we immediately turned to a two-region special case. There
are obvious advantages to "twoness," in terms of reducing the problem
to a manageable size (and even the two-region case has its subtleties
and surprises). Nonetheless, a theoretical analysis of economic geogra-
phy must for several reasons make an effort to get beyond the two-
location case. First, though the models we study here are aggressively
unrealistic, they are intended to shed light on reality, and by and large
real-world geographical issues cannot be easily mapped into two-
region analyses. Second, at least part of the tradition in location theory
is explicitly spatial, that is, it emphasizes the positioning of activities
across different locations (and often does so in continuous space);
though we need not be slavishly bound by tradition, there is something
to be said for trying to see how much of the traditional emphasis can be
saved in the new models. Third and perhaps most important, however,
applying the basic approach of the last chapter to the many-region case
yields some striking new results. In particular, it turns out that we can
gain some unexpectedly simple insights into seemingly intractable is-
sues using an approach borrowed from work in theoretical biology by
none other than Alan Turing. Let us begin, however, with the most
obvious generalization of the two-region case: to three regions.

6.1 The Three-Region Case

It is easy to write out a three-region version of the two-region model
in chapter 5. Simply imagine three regions located at the corners
of an equilateral triangle, with a transport cost T in each direction,
and give each region an agricultural sector of size (1 - p)/3 instead
80                                                             Chapter 6




Figure 6.1
Three-region dynamics, T = 2.5


of (1 - p)/2. The equations are obvious and need not be written
explicitly.
  Getting analytical results is more of a problem. It is easy, however,
to solve the model numerically and to present these numerical results
graphically; the results strongly suggest that the qualitative behavior
of a three-region model is very similar to that of a two-region model.
  The fact that any allocation of manufacturing among the three re-
gions can be represented in two dimensions, as a point on the unit
simplex, makes the three-region model relatively easy to visualize. At
such a point location, Y has share h , of workers, and these shares sum
to unity. We can then get a sense of the model's dynamics by drawing
a "vector field": We compute regional real wages for a number of
different points (A,, A2, h3) on that simplex, use those real wages to
calculate (using (5.2)) the implied rates of change of the regional manu-
facturing shares (i,,  i2, h3)and represent those rates of change by an
arrow whose size is proportional to that vector. We can then usually
get a clear picture of the model's dynamics by simply following the
arrows.
  Figures 6.1, 6.2, and 6.3 illustrate typical vector fields for a three-
region model with p = 0.4 and (r = 5. They closely parallel figures 5.1,
5.2, and 5.3. Figure 6.1 illustrates a high transport cost case, T = 2.5.
Clearly, there is a unique stable equilibrium with manufacturing
equally divided among the regions. Figure 6.2 illustrates a low trans-
Many Regions and Continuous Space                                      81




Figure 6.2
Three-region dynamics, T = 1.5




Figure 6.3
Three-region dynamics, T = 1.9


port cost case, T = 1.5. Here the equal-division equilibrium is clearly
unstable; instead, manufacturing always ends up concentrated in one
region. Which region depends on initial conditions: The simplex is ob-
viously divided into three basins of attraction, each of which "drains"
to one of the corners, that is, to concentration of manufacturing in one
of the regions. Finally, figure 6.3 illustrates a more complex interme-
diate transport cost case, T = 1.9. In this case there are four basins of
82                                                               Chapter 6


attraction: a central basin (corresponding to a fairly even initial distri-
bution) that drains to an equal division of manufacturing among the
regions, and a basin leading to concentration of manufacturing in each
of the regions. Between the four stable equilibria lie three unstable
ones.
   The qualitative similarity of these results to what we found in the
two-region case is obvious. Presumably it is possible to summarize the
whole sequence with a three-dimensional bifurcation diagram-but
this is beyond our artistic ability.
   We could clearly take the next step and examine an economy with
four equidistant regions, then five, and so on; graphical analysis
would be first difficult then impossible, but it should still be possible
to derive some results. These extensions seem unlikely, however, to
add much insight. Furthermore, whereas the case of three locations
laid out in a triangle makes some intuitive sense, four locations laid
out in a tetrahedron are hard to visualize in our still mainly earthbound
economy.
   On the other hand, a general model with many regions laid out in
some arbitrary pattern seems unlikely to yield any simple results. To
the extent that progress has been made in the many-region case, it has
mainly been by assuming a particular unrealistic but useful "geome-
try": a number of regions laid out in a circle, with transportation possi-
ble only along the rim of that circle.

6.2 The Racetrack Economy

The special case we have come to think of as the "racetrack economy"
maintains all of the assumptions of the many-region model introduced
in chapter 5, together with the following special simplifications: the R
regions are equally spaced around the circumference of a circle, with
region Y + 1 next to region Y, and with region R next to region 1. Agri-
culture is evenly divided among the regions. Transportation must take
place around the circumference, with a constant fraction z of each man-
ufactured good melting away per unit distance. The easiest way to rep-
resent this is by letting the transport cost between r and s be defined
as


where Ir - s l is the (shorter) distance around the circle from r to s.
(Think of a clock face: The distance from 3 to 10 is 5-not 7-because
Many Regions and Continuous Space                                       83




Figure 6.4
Evolution of manufacturing with twelve locations


you can get there more easily by going counterclockwise than clock-
wise.) It is convenient to normalize distances so that the circumference
of the circle is 2n, and thus make the distance between any two neigh-
boring regions 2 n / X . The longest distance in the economy then has
transport cost which we shall refer to as T,,, = eTn.
   As in the two- and three-region cases, it is useful to begin analyzing
this model with numerical examples. Once we go beyond three regions,
however, we can no longer represent initial conditions as points in a
one- or two-dimensional space and thus summarize the model’s dy-
namics with a simple graph. Instead we must try to learn something
about the model’s behavior by making experiments-trying out a
number of different initial conditions for a number of different parame-
ter values, and seeing what happens.
   One obvious way to do this is to start with manufacturing randomly
allocated across regions. Figure 6.4 shows the results of a typical run
carried out in this way, with j-4 = 0.4, CJ = 5, T,,,= 4 on a twelve-region
landscape. (Examples with twelve regions are often illuminating, be-
cause twelve is a fairly small number with a large number of divisors.)
The solid portions of the bars show the initial, random shares of the
regions in manufacturing. The shaded portions of the bars shows
where the shares settle after the economy has been allowed to evolve
for a while. In the case illustrated we see that all manufacturing
becomes concentrated in two regions. Furthermore, the division of
84                                                               Chapter 6




Figure 6.5
Evolution of manufacturing with many locations


manufacturing between these regions is remarkably equal, and the two
regions are equally spaced: Remember that location 12 is next to loca-
tion l, so the agglomerations are at exact opposite sides of the racetrack,
with five agricultural regions lying between in both directions.
   The picture portrayed in figure 6.4 comes from a random initial divi-
sion of manufacturing labor among regions. Repeating the experiment
with the same parameter values but different initial values, we find
that manufacturing almost always ends up in two regions. They are
not always exactly opposite each other, nor of exactly equal size, but
there is clearly a good deal of regularity.
   We can make the regularity even more consistent in a somewhat
surprising way. Instead of making the initial distribution of manufac-
turing random, make it a small random deviation from uniformity; that
is, start with the distribution of manufacturing close to no structure at
all. This initial position may be thought of as a small perturbation of
a known equilibrium. After all, given the regions’ symmetry, a position
in which manufacturing is equally distributed among them -the ”flat
earth”-must also be a position in which real wages are the same in
all locations. But the flat earth turns out to be unstable; the circular
logic of concentration causes an even slightly perturbed flat earth spon-
taneously to develop one or more local concentrations of manufactur-
ing. Figure 6.5 (which Northwestern University’s Robert Gordon
instantly dubbed the ’59 Cadillac diagram’’ at a seminar presentation)
                        ”
Many Regions and Continuous Space                                      85


illustrates this process. There are now 100 regions, instead of 12, ar-
ranged along the front horizontal axis; the vertical axis measures the
share of each region in the manufacturing labor force. The figure traces
out the full evolution of the economy with time running back into the
figure. From an almost flat but randomly perturbed initial distribution
of manufacturing, the model again evolves into a structure in which
all manufacturing is concentrated in only two regions. In this example,
the two ”winning” regions are again exactly opposite one another, and
it turns out that we can guarantee this regularity as long as the initial
distribution of manufacturing is sufficiently flat.
   Experiments with the racetrack economy, then, offer striking exam-
ples of emergent structure. From randomness, order emerges, order
that oddly seems more predictable the less structure there is in the
initial conditions. What can explain this regularity?

6.3 The Turing Approach

The scenario illustrated in figure 6.5; in which an almost flat distribu-
tion of manufacturing evolves over time into a very uneven but regular
structure, bears a close resemblance to the problem addressed in a
classic paper in theoretical biology by none other than Alan Turing
(1952): How does an embryo, an almost homogeneous group of cells,
organize itself into a highly differentiated organism? Indeed, Turing’s
central analytical model was of a simplified embryo consisting of a ring
of cells, a setup virtually identical to that of the racetrack economy.
And we can therefore make direct use here of Turing’s ingenious
approach.
   Although Turing himself stated his analysis in terms of a large but
finite number of cells, the presentation of the approach is actually
easier in terms of continuous space. Thus for the rest of this chapter
we shift from the analysis of discrete regions to that of continuous
space, with h(u)now the density of manufacturing at location Y on the
circle.
   The first step in applying the Turing approach is to make a selective
and unusual limitation of focus. It is natural to suppose that we must
model either the whole evolution of the economy, as in figure 6.5, or
at least ask where the dynamic process arrives in the end, as in figure
6.4. Turing, however, suggested that it was useful to focus instead
on the beginning of the process of differentiation-on the way that
the initial symmetry among cells might be broken. In our case, this
86                                                                     Chapter 6


means focusing on the early stages of the process illustrated in figure
6.5: on the initial divergence of the economy away from the flat earth
equilibrium.
   The advantage of this focus is that it allows us to linearize the model.
Let us state a sort of general, reduced-form version of our model, leav-
ing the details for later. We have a situation in which the rate of change
of any one region’s manufacturing sector depends on the distribution
of manufacturing across all regions. We know that there is an equilib-
rium in which all regions have the same level of industry; call this flat
earth level h. And let us suppose that there are a very large number
of regions, so that we can treat space as effectively continuous. Then
a reduced-form version of our model’s dynamics in the vicinity of the
flat earth is




That is, the rate of change of manufacturing at location Y depends on
the concentrations of manufacturing at all other locations, with the im-
pact of manufacturing at another location, Y + 8, depending on the
distance between those two locations, 8, according to the function k(8).
As long as one is willing to examine dynamics near the flat earth, then,
we can study a linear system like (6.2) instead of the highly nonlinear
system our model presents in the general case.
   Now comes the second step in Turing analysis: realizing that the
system (6.2) actually has surprisingly simple dynamic behavior. Sup-
pose for a moment that the actual deviation of manufacturing from its
flat earth value could be described by a simple sinusoidal fluctuation,’

h(r) - h = 6 COS(VY),                                                       (6.3)
where v is an integer-so that the fluctuation goes an integer number
of times around the circle-and measures the frequency of the fluctua-
tion. We can substitute this into (6.2) to get

i ( r ) = 6 I - l k ( 8 ) cos(vr + v8)dO.

  But this can be simplified. First, it happens to be true that cos(v +
x) = COS(Y) cos(x) - sin(r) sin@). So (6.4) may be rewritten

                       k ( 8 ) cos(ve)d8 - 6 sin(vr)   k ( 8 ) sin(v8)dO.   (6.5)
Many Regions and Continuous Space                                           87



Second, because the effect of a manufacturing concentration depends
only on how far away it is, not on which direction, k ( x ) = k ( - x ) . This,
together with the fact that sin(-x) + sin(x) = 0, means that the second
integral in (6.5) is 0. Using (6.3) in (6.5) now gives




The integral in this equation is a constant, depending on neither Y nor
h. It does, however, depend on the frequency of the sinusoidal de\ria-
tion, v. To signal this let us call it y\,,




   Although there is no reason to suppose that the actual spatial distri-
bution of manufacturing looks like (6.3),we have just shown that (6.3)
defines an eigenfiinction of the dynamic system-the continuous ver-
sion of an eigenvector. Equation (6.6) expresses our system of differen-
tial equations (6.2) in terms of a differential equation for the
eigenfunction (6.3) with eigenvalue given by 'yv. In fact any sinusoidal
fluctuation is an eigenfunction, with an eigenvalue-a             rate of
growth-that depends on its frequency, v.
   One analyzes a linear dynamic system, of course, by decom-
posing the initial vector of evolving variables into a weighted sum of
eigenvectors, each of which then grows at its own characteristic
rate, equal to the associated eigenvalue. One need only then decom-
pose the distribution of manufacturing around its flat earth density
into regular sinusoidal fluctuations. But this is a familiar procedure: It
is precisely what one does in representing the distribution as a Fourier
series.
   Now comes the final step in the Turing approach. Each frequency,
v, has its own eigenvalue, given by (6.7). For some frequencies this may
be negative; deviations from the flat earth at these frequencies die
away. If all frequencies have negative eigenvalues, then all die away,
meaning that the flat earth equilibrium is stable. However, if any fre-
quency has a positive eigenvalue, deviations at this frequency increase
in amplitude over time, and the flat earth is unstable. Moreover, if we
start close to the flat earth, by the time the economy has diverged suffi-
ciently from that position, the fluctuation whose frequency has the
largest positive eigenvalue-the most unstable frequency-comes to
88                                                             Chapter 6


dominate all others, giving the pattern of agglomerations that develops
in the economy.
  Of course, this reasoning is based on the economy’s local behavior
in the neighborhood of the flat earth, and we cannot be certain that it
predicts the system’s behavior far away from the flat earth. But it seems
to. Recall that figure 6.5 was constructed by starting with random per-
turbations and letting the economy evolve. From the randomness an
extremely regular structure developed, and we now know it is because
this economy has its largest eigenvalue at frequency v = 2.
  The next step is to relate the eigenvalues, which determine the econ-
omy’s dynamics, to the more fundamental parameters of tastes, tech-
nology, and transportation.

6.4 The Growth Rate of a Fluctuation

To apply the Turing approach to the racetrack economy, we need to
develop an expression that determines how the growth rate of a fluc-
tuation-a sinusoidal deviation from uniformity in the distribution of
manufacturing of the form described by (6.3)-is affected by the fre-
quency of that fluctuation. To do this, we need only to discover the
pattern of real wages associated with a deviation in manufacturing em-
ployment. The reason this suffices is that we have assumed (equation
(5.2)) that the growth rate of a region’s manufiacturing is proportional
to the deviation of its real wage from the average; so whichever fre-
quency fluctuation is associated with the greatest variation in real
wages per unit amplitude defines the fastest-growing, ”preferred”
frequency.
   To find this frequency, let us restate the racetrack model in continu-
ous space, now allowing the economy to be a circle whose circumfer-
ence is 270, where D is the size of the economy and T,,,        eMD.(The
reasons for not normalizing to a size 2n will become apparent be-
low.) We choose units so that the agricultural labor force is equal to
(1 - p)nD and the manufacturing labor force to pnD. This means that
the density of agricultural labor per unit space is (1 - p)/2 and, at the
flat earth, the density of manufacturing is p/2. We define h(v) such
that the density of manufacturing labor per unit space is ph(r), and at
flat earth h = 0.5.
   In this economy, the equations for instantaneous equilibrium may
be written
Many Regions and Continuous Space                                     89



Y ( r ) = ph(r)w(r)+ 1 - P
                       2 ,
                        ~




and
W ( U ) = w(r)G(r)-p

These are just the continuous space analogues of equations (5.3)-(5.6).
They do not look very appealing, but we can as usual quickly deter-
mine the flat earth equilibrium; when h = 0.5 everywhere, we have
w = 1, Y = 0.5; and the Flat Earth value of the price index is



   The next step is to linearize the model around the flat earth equilib-
rium, a process that turns out to very similar to the analysis of symme-
try breaking in section 5.4. Let us use a prime on a variable to denote
deviation from the flat earth. Totally differentiating (6.8), we derive,

Y’(U) = 1h’(r) +       w’(r),
                   2




                                                                   (6.10)




and
w’(T) = [zu’(Y) - pG’(r)/G]G-p.
90                                                                      Chapter 6


  This still looks like a fairly intractable system. But now we impose
the assumption that (6.3) holds: that h(r) is a sinusoidal fluctuation
around the flat earth equilibrium, taking the form
h'(r) = 61, cos(vr).                                                        (6.11)
This generates sinusoidal fluctuations in other endogenous variables,
so these take the form:
Y'(r) = 6,, cos(vr),

C;'(y> = 6 G cos(vr),
 G
                                                                            (6.12)
70'(r) = 6,,, cos(vr),

and
o'(r) = 6, cos(vr).
The coefficients 6, ,  6,,.,and 6, are found by using (6.11) and (6.12)
in the system (6.10).The resulting system can be greatly simplified, in
the same way that the symmetry-breaking equations in the two-region
case could be simplified, by introducing a new variable Z ,

                                                                            (6.13)

or (looking up the rules for integrating functions of the form C O S ( X ) P - I )

                                                                            (6.14)

The system of equations (6.10) now reduces simply to'

6, = p61, + CI 6,,,,
              -
              2

      2z 61, + Z6,,<,
6, = ____
      1-0
                                                                            (6.15)
06,,, = 226) + (0- l)Z6,,
and
G'6, = 6[,%
          - p6G.
Many Regions and Continuous Space                                       91



  This system is identical to the set of equations for symmetry breaking
in the two-region case, (5.21), (5.24), (5.25), and (5.26).We can use it to
derive, as we did in chapter 5, the following expression:

                                                                     (6.16)

The ratio 6,/6,, measures the effect of a small sinusoidal perturba-
tion in manufacturing employment on the real wage, as we can see
by taking the ratio of the last equation in (6.12) to (6.11), giving
w’(r)/h’(r) = 6 , / 6 k .
  We can now complete the analysis. The differential equation giving
the change in manufacturing employment is %(r) = y[o(r) - o]h(r),
equation (5.2). At the flat earth, the average real wage 0 is unity, and
h = 0.5, so linearizing yields

                        m‘(r)
%’(r) = yco’(r)h(r) = y -.                                           (6.17)
                              2
Because CO’(r ) / h’( r ) = 6 , /   ah, this becomes
                        6,
       6 , cos(vr) = y -X(r).
V(r)= y-                                                             (6.18)
            2                 26,,
This says that the sinusoidal deviation h’(r) = 6h cos(vr) is an eigen-
function with eigenvalue ‘yv = y6,/26,,, where the term 6,/6h is given
by equation (6.16).As is clear from equations (6.16) and (6.14) this de-
pends on the parameters of the model p, p, (or 0)and z, and also on
v, the frequency of the fluctuation. We must now investigate how these
parameters determine the sign and magnitude of the eigenvalue, and
find the preferred frequency: the value of v that gives the largest posi-
tive eigenvalue.

6.5   Determining the Preferred Frequency: The Large Economy

It is possible to derive some relatively clear results if we focus on the
case of a very extensive economy, that is, one with a large D. In that
case our problem becomes substantially simpler in two ways. First, Z
becomes a much simpler expression: The second term in (6.14) tends
toward 1, so that we have
         T’(0   - 1)’
Z=                                                                  (6.19)
      z2(0 - 1)’   + V”
92                                                                    Chapter 6


which is monotonically decreasing in V. Second, if the economy is large,
we may guess that the preferred frequency corresponds to a wave-
length that is only a small fraction of 2nD. That means that the integer
constraint on the allowed frequencies-the requirement that a fluctua-
tion go an integer number of times around the circle-are much less
noticeable, and we can treat v and hence Z as approximately continu-
ous variables.
   Suppose, then, that we treat Z as a continuous variable, which we
know can only vary between 0 (for v extremely large) and 1 (as v ap-
proaches 0). What can we then learn from (6.16),which relates Z to the
rate of growth of a fluctuation? First, we note immediately that when
Z = 0, so is 6 , / 6 k . Second, for small positive Z , 6 , / & is strictly posi-
tive. That is, high-frequency, short wavelength fluctuations tend to
grow over time. Third, we note that when Z approaches 1 (corre-
sponding to very-long-wavelength fluctuations), the sign of 6,/                is
the same as the sign of p(1 + p) - (p’ + p); this can be rearranged as
(p - p)(l - p), which is negative provided that p < p. This condi-
tion is already familiar from chapters 4 and 5: It is the no-black-hole
condition that says that increasing returns at the level of the economy
as a whole are not so strong that manufacturing agglomerates re-
gardless of transportation costs. Combining these statements, we
can be sure that as we decrease frequency the eigenvalue first in-
creases from 0 to a positive value, then goes negative. This means that
there is a range of frequencies at which flat earth is unstable, and an
interior frequency at which the eigenvalue takes its largest positive
value.
   The relationship between frequency and eigenvalue is illustrated in
figure 6.6, which has frequency v on the horizontal, 6,/6h on the verti-
cal (and is computed with Z given by (6.14), not the approximation
on which we based our discussion, (6.19)).It confirms the discussion,
showing a range of frequencies at which the flat earth is unstable, and
an interior frequency at which the eigenvalue is maximized.
   We have argued that the frequency that comes to dominate is the
one with the largest positive eigenvalue-frequency 2 in the example
of figure 6.6. How this frequency depends on the model’s parameters is
best illustrated by numerical example, and table 6.1 gives the preferred
frequency as a function of p, 0,and T,,,. We see that the higher are
transport costs, the higher is the preferred frequency. This result is very
natural and says that when transport costs are high, there are relatively
Many Regions and Continuous Space                                      93




             0       1   2       3   4       5   6       7   V

Figure 6.6
Eigenvalues as a function of frequency


Table 6.1
Preferred frequency




T,,,   = 2       2           1           1           4       2    2
Tmax = 4         3           2           1           7       5    3
T,,,   = 8       5           3           2       11          7    4



many relatively small concentrations of manufacturing activity. If there
were not, the costs of supplying agricultural regions with manufactures
would be prohibitive. A high value of o has the same effect, and for
similar reasons. When o is high, trade volumes decline very rapidly
as a function of distance, encouraging relatively many agglomerations.
   The effect of a high share of industry in the economy, p, is to reduce
the preferred frequency, meaning that (starting from the flat earth)
there are a few large agglomerations, rather than many small ones. This
is because the forward and backward linkages created by concentrating
industry are more powerful the greater the share of industry in the
cost-of-living index (the forward linkage) and the greater the share of
the population (and hence of income and demand) that is mobile (back-
ward linkage).
94                                                               Chapter 6


6.6 From Local to Global

The Turing analysis of sections 6.3-6.5 is local; that is, it is based on a
linear approximation to the model around the flat earth. This raises
two questions: First, what happens as the system evolves away from
the flat earth? Second, what would happen if the economy were at
some point other than the flat earth, and then experienced a parameter
change? We have no analytical approach to answering either of these
questions, but simulation gives an answer that seems to be robust.
   We can see what happens as we move away from the flat earth by
comparing figures 6.6 and 6.5, both of which were constructed for the
same parameter values. From figure 6.6 we see that the preferred fre-
quency is 2. Looking at figure 6.5, we see the emergence of two agglom-
erations, and the advantage of the two emergent agglomerations
apparently cumulates as the process continues, giving the global pic-
ture of figure 6.6. We have not found any cases in which the initial
advantage predicted by the Turing analysis gets overturned.
   The second question is more difficult. Suppose that some pattern of
agglomeration is established, and there is then parameter change, say
a continuing reduction in trade costs. What happens to the agglomera-
tion? The existing structure is robust to parameter changes in a large
interval, but may then undergo catastrophic change, as, at some param-
eter values, the economy reorganizes into a different structure. We ad-
dress this issue more fully in chapter 17.

6.7   Conclusions

We started this chapter with a concern: that the intuition developed in
chapter 5 depended too much on exercises with a two-region model,
that matters might look different once we turn to multiple regions,
or for that matter abandon the idea of regions entirely and deal with
continuous space. And in a way these concerns are justified: Many-
region models do contain possibilities excluded in the two-region case
and require new tools of analysis. In particular, we are forced to shift
focus from the question of whether agglomeration takes place to that
of how many agglomerations form and where they are located relative
to one another. We also learn, however, that much of the intuition from
the core-periphery model survives. The same factors that work toward
concentration of economic activity in that model tend to produce
fewer, larger concentrations in a multiple-region or continuous-space
Many Regions and Continuous Space                                                    95


model. And we find an unexpected parallel between two-region and
continuous-space models: When we analyze the process of spatial dif-
ferentiation using the Turing approach, the set of equations that we
need to solve turns out to be isomorphic to those we used to calculate
the break point in the core-periphery analysis.
  Alas, beauty is not truth, in geography or in life. We have seen that
much of what we learned from the core-periphery model survives a
relaxation of the unrealistic assumption that there are only two regions.
But how does it survive relaxation of another unrealistic assumption,
that agricultural goods are costless to transport?

Appendix: Simulation Parameters

All figures have CJ = 5 and p = 0.4. Figures 6.1-6.3 have T = 2.5, 1.5,
and 1.9, respectively. Figures 6.4-6.6 have T,,, = 4.

Notes

1. We state this fluctuation as a cosine wave. However, one can define any fluctuation
as a sine simply by relabeling the origin on the circle.
2. We use again the properties of cos(vr + vs) that were discussed in section 6.3.
This page intentionally left blank
7                                      Agricultural Transport
                                       costs




The analysis of preceding chapters turns on the presence of trade costs
incurred in selling manufacturing output in distant locations, but we
have assumed that the other sector-agriculture-incurs       no such costs.
This does yeoman duty as a simplifying assumption, but is clearly false.
What difference does it make if both sectors’ outputs bear trade costs?
Intuitively, agricultural trade costs seem clearly to be a force against
agglomeration. A location with a concentration of manufacturing has
to import agricultural products; transport costs raise the price of these
products, increasing the cost of living in the location and making immi-
gration less likely. Can agricultural transport costs overturn the analy-
sis of the preceding chapters?
   In this chapter we investigate these issues and show how agricultural
transport costs reduce the range of parameters for which agglomera-
tion occurs. However, we also find that reductions in agricultural trans-
port costs can cause the core-periphery geography to develop, just as
a reduction in manufactures’ transport costs did in chapter 5 . This pro-
vides an alternative story about the trigger for agglomeration, and per-
haps one more historically relevant than changes in transport costs on
manufactures alone.

7.1 Trade Costs: The Realities

Because transport costs are central to our approach, we must ask how
large they are in reality. There are two main sources of evidence on
this question. The first is to try to measure these costs directly, and the
second comes from looking at trade volumes, and seeing how rapidly
they fall off over distance.
  The former approach yields many estimates of transport costs. A
good example is provided by Rauch (1996), who divides commodities
98                                                               Chapter 7


according to whether they are homogeneous or differentiated. In the
former class he places commodities for which quoted prices are avail-
able, either because they are traded on organized exchanges, or because
they have a reference price. In the latter class he puts industries where
product differentiation means that prices cannot be quoted without
going down to the level of the individual supplying firm. Taking as
an example U.S.-Japan trade, Rauch estimates transport costs (insur-
ance plus freight costs) of around 13 percent of value for homogeneous
products and 6 percent for differentiated products.
   This approach has the disadvantage that the transport costs that ap-
pear in our models are only metaphorical: We are really interested in
all of the costs of doing business over geographical space. In other
words, we want for the theory a measure of the full cost, including all
the costs of doing business at a distance-lack of face-to-face contact,
more complex and expensive communications and information gather-
ing, and possibly also different languages, legal systems, product stan-
dards and cultures. These things are difficult to measure directly but
are revealed in the trade data: If the volume of trade between a pair
of locations is lower the further apart they are, then presumably this
is because the full cost of making the trade is higher.
   The standard way of estimating the relationship between trade vol-
umes and distance is by means of gravity models. (See Learner and
Levinsohn 1996 for an overview of these models.) Distance always ap-
pears as a highly significant determinant of trade flows, typically with
the elasticity of trade with respect to distance being of the order -0.6
to -1.0.
   Can gravity models provide any measure of how trade costs differ
between different sectors? There is an obvious difficulty, for elasticities
of demand may simply differ between sectors-so a given trade cost
has a different impact on trade volumes. Rauch (1996) attempted to
make such a disaggregation. He found that the distance coefficient is
similar for differentiated products and homogeneous products and ar-
gued that this is because the greater complexity of gathering informa-
tion about differentiated goods offsets lower transport costs on these
products.
   This brief overview suggests, then, that sectors other than the manu-
facture of differentiated products have substantial trade costs, proba-
bly at least as large as those for differentiated products. In our
framework these other sectors are aggregated into "agriculture," and
we now turn to analyzing the effects of such costs.
Agricultural Transport Costs                                                 99


7.2 Trade Costs: The Model

We begin by assuming, as in the previous chapter, that agriculture is
a homogeneous good and that one unit of agricultural labor can pro-
duce one unit of output. Each region has half the total endowment of
agricultural labor, and we denote the agricultural wage in region Y as
wf.The agricultural wage equals the price of agriculture, but these
wages and prices are no longer equalized between regions because of
the presence of iceberg transport costs on agriculture at the rate T A .
The difference between agricultural wages in the two regions depends
on whether the region is an importer or exporter of agriculture which,
given agricultural supply, depends on demand and hence income in
each region. Figure 7.1 outlines the possibilities. The horizontal axis
measures each region’s share of income, and the solid curve traces out
the agricultural wage in region 1 relative to that in region 2, z i ( / z i 7 ~ ,
as a function of income shares.
   Suppose region 1 has a high share of world income (as it will if it
contains manufacturing). Then we are at a point toward the right of
the diagram, and zuf / zu; = T A .This is because whenever region 1 im-
ports agricultural goods, they are T A times as expensive in 1 as in
2. Now consider the central part of the figure. If the two regions have
equal incomes, then there is no agricultural trade, and agricultural




         0.0                      0.5                        1


Figure 7.1
Agricultural wages and prices
100                                                             Chapter 7


wages are equal in both regions. What happens in band aa around this
central point? Moving to the right of the symmetric equilibrium raises
demand for agriculture in region 1, raising the price in 1 relative to 2.
But only when w;'   / 70; reaches T Adoes trade commence, so in the band
an there is no trade in agriculture.
   Given this description of agricultural prices and wages, we are now
in a position to see how the presence of agricultural trade costs changes
our results. We employ the model of section 5.3 but now use super-
scripts M and A to distinguish between variables in manufacturing and
in agriculture. Letting 7uy and w: denote wages in the two sectors,
income in each country takes the form




Y 2 = (1 - h)pzuY + q 7 u ; .

  The manufacturing sector is exactly as described in section 5.3. Su-
perscripting manufacturing variables with M, we have price indices
and wage equations in each region,
GY = [h(w:)'-" + (1 - h ) ( ~ y T ~ ) ~ - " ] ' / ' - ~ ,            (7.3)




  The only other modification we need to make is to allow for differing
agricultural prices in the cost of living in each country. The real wages
of manufacturing workers become




7.3 Core-Periphery or Symmetry?

How do agricultural transport costs change the structure of equi-
libria? We analyze this question as before, in two parts, asking if the
core-periphery structure is sustainable and whether the symmetric
equilibrium is stable or unstable. To investigate the stability of a core-
Agricultural Transport Costs                                          101


periphery structure we assume that such a structure is in place, then
check whether it is an equilibrium.'
  Suppose that all manufacturing is concentrated in region 1, h = 1.
Region 1 must then be importing agriculture, so if we use region 2
agricultural labor as numeraire, we have zut = 1 and zi$ = T A > 1.
  To find country 1 manufacturing wages, notice that world income
[adding (7.1) and (7.2)] is

Y1 + Y2 = p7uy + * ( T A         + 1).                               (7.9)
                    2
The value of manufacturing output, pwr, equals demand for manufac-
tures, p(YI + Y2), hence
       1+ TA
7uy = -.                                                            (7.10)
         2
Income levels in the two countries are therefore

Y' = T A + p,   Y2 =   -.1 - P                                      (7.11)
         2                2
     ~




Given that region 2 agricultural output is used as numeraire, the ag-
ricultural trade costs increase nominal income and manufacturing
wages in region 1.
   The region 2 manufacturing wage is given by the wage equation.
h = 1 implies that price indices take values Gt' = 7uy, G)' = zu:'T"',
and using this together with the value of income (7.11) in (7.6) gives

                                                                   (7.12)

The cost-of-living index in region 2 differs from that in region 1 by
factor (TM)p(TA)p-',because region 2 has cheaper agriculture but more
expensive manufactures than region 1.The ratio of real manufacturing
wages is therefore




The core-periphery structure is an equilibrium if this is less than unity,
so that manufacturing labor has no incentive to move from region 1
to region 2.
                                                                   Chapter 7



                                                      TA= 1.2
    1.1
                                                       TA= 1.1

                                                       T A = 1.0

    1.0




   0.9 4         .                                      Thi
             -

       1.0                1.4                1.8

Figure 7.2
Sustain curves


   This is a generalization of the sustain point condition derived in
chapter 5, to which it reduces when T A= 1.The presence of agricultural
trade costs enters in two distinct ways. First, inside the square brackets,
having T A > 1 reduces the value of the expression, making it easier
to sustain the core-periphery structure. This is a backward linkage
effect: Because region 1 agricultural wages are higher, so is nominal
income and demand in region 1, making it a more attractive location
for manufacturing. The second effect comes from the term ( T A ) ' p,
measuring the effect of the higher agricultural price on the cost-of-
living index. This raises the value of the expression, making it more
difficult to sustain agglomeration, because the region with manufac-
turing now has higher-priced agricultural products, making it more
difficult for the region to hold labor and increasing the incentive for
emigration.
   The latter effect must dominate the former for a region importing
agriculture, shifting the o2/ o,schedule upward. Figure 7.2 illustrates
02/01   as a function of T Mfor three different values of T A .The lowest
is T " = 1, and the curve is exactly as in figure 5.5. The core-periphery
structure is sustainable for all values of T"' less than t,.
   The second curve is for an intermediate level of T A .We now see
that the core-periphery structure is sustainable only in the interval tt,
because at low levels of T'" the benefits to firms of proximity to region
1's market of manufacturing workers become relatively small; supply-
Agricultural Transport Costs                                                    103


ing from region 2 would incur only low transport costs. But manufac-
turing workers in region 1 have to pay the higher price for imported
agricultural goods. Manufacturing workers can therefore gain by de-
fecting to region 2.
   The highest curve is drawn at a level of T,4high enough to prevent
the core-periphery structure from ever being sustainable.
   The precise location of these curves depends on other parameters in
the sustain condition. A higher value of p shifts the curves downward
(for T A = 1 this is a clockwise rotation around the origin), because
a higher share of mobile workers strengthens backward linkages and
supports the core-periphery structure. A lower value of CJ has similar
effect, again increasing the range of values of T," for which agglomera-
tion is sustainable.
   We now turn to the question of whether the symmetric equilibrium
is stable or unstable, and outline the answer. As we saw in chapter 5,
we address this question by differentiating the equilibrium around the
symmetric point and evaluating the differential, d ( o , - o , ) / d h . If the
differential is positive, then the symmetric equilibrium is unstable, be-
cause adding more manufacturing workers to region 1 raises their real
wages. Conducting this analysis on equations (7.1)-(7.8)proceeds simi-
larly to the analysis of section 5.4, but now there is an extra endogenous
variable, d7uA(= dzuf = - d w f ) . We need a further equation to give us
this term, and we can see where it comes from by inspection of figure
7.1. In the neighborhood of the symmetric equilibrium there is no trade
in agriculture, so agricultural prices adjust to equate the value of sup-
ply and of demand in each region separately. The value of supply of
agriculture in region 1 is (1 - p)wt/2, and expenditure on agriculture
is (1 - p) Y , , so the equation is dwA = 2dY.
   Derivation of the equation for d ( w , - w 2 ) / d his given in appendix
7.1 (which calculates a general case, including the material of part 4
of this chapter). It turns out that providing p > p (the no-black-hole
condition), agricultural trade costs are sufficient to ensure that d ( o l -
w 2 ) / d h < 0 for all values of T M > 1, so at no p i n f is syizzzizetry brokeiz.
This means that starting from a high level of manufacturing trade costs
at which the core-periphery structure is not sustainable, reductions
in these trade costs move the economy into a region where a core-
periphery structure is possible. But because there is no break point, the
symmetric equilibrium never becomes unstable, and, under our simple
dynamics, there is no reason to expect a core-periphery structure
104                                                              Chapter 7




      1.0     1.2        1.4        1.6         1.8   TM
Figure 7.3
Bifurcation with homogenous agriculture, T A= 1.1


to form. The intuition is straightforward. Adding a manufacturing
worker to a region raises the price of agricultural products in the re-
gion. This increase is large enough to prevent migration from raising
real wages.
   Summarizing, the structure of equilibria takes the following form.
   If there are no agricultural transport costs, T A = 1, then the analysis
is as in chapter 5. Both sustain and break points occur at T M> 1, sup-
porting equilibria as illustrated in figure 5.4.
   If T A> 1 but is not too large, then there is an interval of manufactur-
ing trade costs (tt of figure 7.2) in which agglomeration can be sus-
tained, but there is no break point. The configuration of equilibria is
as illustrated in figure 7.3. In the interval ft, agglomeration and the
symmetric equilibrium are all stable equilibria. Between stable equilib-
ria there must be unstable equilibria, and these have been computed
as the dashed lines in figure 7.3. However, the symmetric equilibrium
never becomes unstable, so if we imagine a path of the economy in
which T Mfalls through time (exogenously), then there is no reason to
believe that a core-periphery structure will form.
   Finally, if T A > 1 and large, then the range of values of T Mwith-
in which agglomeration can be sustained disappears. The symmetric
equilibrium is unique for all levels of manufacturing transport
costs.
Agricultural Transport Costs                                          105


7.4 Differentiated Agricultural Products

The analysis so far describes what happens when trade costs are im-
posed on an agricultural sector that produces a single type of homoge-
neous product. The assumption of homogeneity of agricultural output
 is the simplest and most natural assumption to make but is empirically
 unsatisfactory: Different regions usually produce different crops.
    In addition to being empirically unsatisfactory, assuming homogene-
ity of agriculture turns out to have the peculiar implication that even
infinitesimal transport costs have a major qualitative impact on the
economy’s dynamics: No matter how small the costs of transporting
agricultural goods, introducing these costs appears to imply that a
symmetric equilibrium is always stable. The reason for this stark result
is, of course, that we test the stability of an equilibrium by looking at
an infinitesimal deviation, dh. The perturbation this causes lies within
the band au of figure 7.1, no matter how narrow this band may be. The
change dh therefore has the same effect on agricultural prices and
wages regardless of the magnitude of T A ,providing     T   d> 1.
                                                                4




    One response to this unsatisfactory implication would be to look at
coordinated action by some mass of industrial workers, say AA. This
could cause a movement outside the band ua, reducing the term dzud4/dY
and causing the symmetric equilibrium to become unstable. The possi-
bility that coordinated action changes the nature of an equilibrium is
a more general point; as we noted in chapter 2, such coordination is a
central feature of Henderson-type urban systems theory. However, our
whole thrust in this book is to pursue the implications of atomistic
action, so this is not a very appealing solution.
    An alternative response is to remove the kinks in the relative wage
schedule of figure 7.1, something that can be accomplished by letting
each region produce slightly different agricultural goods. We retain the
assumptions of perfect competition and constant returns to scale in
agriculture, but just let each region’s output be differentiated from each
other-one region produces grapes, the other grain.2 There is then
trade in agriculture at the symmetric equilibrium, and changes in de-
mand in each region produce smooth responses in trade volumes and
agricultural prices.
   Before we model this alternative structure in detail, it is helpful to
examine how it changes the response of agriculture prices to demand
shifts. Figure 7.4 is like figure 7.1 but contains three curves. These
curves give the response of agricultural prices and wages to income
106                                                              Chapter 7


W/    IW p

        I .4




        1 .o




Figure 7.4
Agricultural wages and prices


differences for three different values of the elasticity of substitution (q)
between the agricultural products of the two regions, and all are drawn
for the same level of agricultural transport costs T A .
   The curve q = 00 is as in figure 7.1, giving the case of a single homoge-
neous agricultural product. The two lower curves are for lower levels
of the elasticity of substitution, q = 20 and q = 10, respectively. There
are two things to note about the effect of introducing product differen-
tiation as represented by these lower elasticities. First, for any division
of world income, the regional differential in agricultural wages is re-
duced. And second, the gradient of this differential in the neighbor-
hood of the symmetric equilibrium is also reduced, because consumers
now demand both agricultural products, and their demand curves for
each are assumed to have strictly negative and continuous gradients.7
   Figure 7.4 suggests that agricultural product differentiation, by re-
ducing the agricultural wage and price differentials between regions,
increases the extent to which a given level of agricultural transport
costs is consistent with a core-periphery structure. We must now model
agricultural product differentiation formally to see if this is so.
   We assume that the elasticity of substitution between the two re-
gions' agricultural products is constant. Demand for each product is
then derived from CES preferences, with a corresponding expenditure
Agricultural Transport Costs                                        107


function or price index. We denote the price index of agriculture in
region Y as Gt\ and, borrowing the apparatus we have developed to
describe demand for manufactures, this takes the form,

                                                                 (7.14)


                                                                 (7.15)

Supply of agriculture is perfectly competitive, and the price of region
f s output is wfin region r, and wt\TAin the other region. Each region
produces an exogenously determined variety of product;4 instead of
the variable h describing the location of production of manufacturing
varieties, we now have the constant, Vz, capturing the equal division
of agricultural varieties between locations.
   Supply and demand determine agricultural prices and wages. The
supply of each variety is (1 - p) / 2 (the number of agricultural work-
ers), and demand for the variety produced in Y is




Equating supply and demand gives the agricultural wage equation
similar to the industrial wage equation,
zut = [Y1(Gt)q--'     + Y~(G~)"-'(T")-'-~]]'/",                  (7.16)


   One further change is needed. The cost-of-living index in each loca-
tion now depends on the price index of agriculture, so equations (7.7)
and (7.8), giving the real wages of manufacturing workers, become,
respectively,
CO' = ~ u ~ ( G ~ ) - P ( G ; ) P - ~ ,                          (7.18)


These six equations, (7.14)-(7.19)/ together with the income equa-
tions and description of manufacturing, (7.1)-(7.6), now define the
equilibrium.
   What structure of equilibria does this model support? As usual we
can answer this by looking at parameters of the model for which the
108                                                                                                                       Chapter 7


 TA

 1.4




1.2




1.o
   1.o                  1.2               1.4                1.6                1.8                  TM
Figure 7.5
Break and sustain points


     YLIIyLILIJ oLcyI iUiIillliV
rnro-norinhorw
-
"I     L
                               h lrliU
                                     r iLmI l iI Vc Oc iU iV cC tUaL iLnL aU Vh Al Lo , Ua Ln LAU Ua Ct V V I L
                                                                                                        urhirh       tho c i r m m o t r i r
                                                                                                                        Y LALLILLL1lL
                                                                                                                ILAL LLKL J


equilibrium becomes destabilized. We begin with a simulation analy-
sis, whose results are shown in figure 7.5.' The horizontal and vertical
axes are transport costs T Mand T Arespectively, and the curves labeled
S S and B B give the sustain and break point values of these costs. The
core-periphery structure is sustainable below SS and unsustainable
above, and the symmetric equilibrium is stable above B B and unstable
below.
   The figure gives a full description of the different equilibrium con-
figurations that arise at different values of transport costs. It is most
easily interpreted by considering the effects of changing TMat different
values of T A .
   At a high level of T A (above the maximum point on SS) there is a
unique equilibrium with activity equally divided between regions. Re-
ductions in TJMdo not bring agglomeration, because agricultural trade
costs are too high for a core-periphery structure to be sustainable.
   At intermediate levels of T A (below the maximum point on SS and
above the maximum on BB), the structure of equilibria is qualitatively
as illustrated in figure 7.3. There is an interval of values of T Mfor which
the core-periphery structure is sustainable, but symmetry is never
broken.
   At values of T A below the maximum point on the BB curve, figure
7.6 illustrates the structure of equilibria (as a function of T M ) .Once
Agricultural Transport Costs                                          109



 h




     1 .o     1.2          1.4        1.6          1.8          T"
Figure 7.6
Bifurcation with product differentiation in agriculture, T   = 1.27



again there is a range of values of T Mat which agglomeration is sustain-
able, and now there is also a pair of break points, between which the
symmetric equilibrium is unstable, so agglomeration must occur. As
T Mis reduced, the number of equilibria changes, 1-5-3-5-1, with ag-
glomeration occurring at intermediate values of TA'.The reason for this
structure of equilibria is that at very high T', the final demand from
immobile agricultural workers ensures a symmetric equilibrium, as
usual. And at very low T Mthe backward and forward linkages op-
erating in manufacturing are extremely weak, and agricultural trans-
port costs therefore outweigh them. Only at intermediate levels of T M
are the backward and forward linkages strong enough to destabilize
the symmetric equilibrium.
   How general is the pattern suggested here? Appendix 7.1 investi-
gates the model's break points and establishes that d w / d h is quadratic
in T'. At T A = 1, d w / d h = 0 has two roots, one at T M = 1 and the
other at T M > 1, exactly as in chapter 5 (see figure 5.6). However,
for T A slightly greater than 1, there must be two roots at values of
T M> 1.The basic shape of the BB curve illustrated is therefore general,
implying that for low values of T Asymmetric outcomes are stable both
at high and at very low values of T M.
   The structure illustrated in figure 7.5 provides a substantial gen-
eralization of the model of chapter 5. It shows that reductions in
110                                                            Chapter 7


agricultural trade costs as well as those on manufacturing trade can
trigger the emergence of a core-periphery structure. More generally,
following some path in which both agricultural and manufacturing
transport costs are falling, perhaps at different rates, moves the econ-
omy across the SS and then the BB line, making a symmetric equilib-
rium unstable and leading to the emergence of a core-periphery
structure. Agricultural transport costs, in other words, work against
agglomeration, so reducing them allows agglomeration to take place.
   Figure 7.5 also shows how reductions in manufacturing trade costs
may lead both to the formation of a core-periphery structure and then
also to its breakup. Essentially the agglomeration forces we describe
throughout this book are strongest at intermediate levels of manufac-
turing trade costs. At high costs, the demand-side centrifugal force cre-
ated by immobile consumers outweighs them, causing manufacturing
to be spread out. But at low trade costs, the supply-side centrifugal
force created by the need to import agricultural goods may outweigh
them. The nonmonotonic effect of trade costs on the pattern of agglom-
eration shown in figure 7.6 is one that we will see recurring in later
chapters.

7.5 Conclusions

Relaxing the model of chapter 5 to allow for transport costs on agricul-
tural goods may seem like a minor extension; and indeed, some of the
insights remain intact (and the general modeling approach is as useful
here as it was there). However, adding agricultural transport costs
turns out to be an important enrichment of the story, one that is more
general than the specifics of our approach here. As long as agricultural
transport was free, all the action-both centripetal and centrifugal
forces-came from the manufacturing sector. The only question, there-
fore, was the direction of the forces generated by that sector: Was the
pull of dispersed consumers stronger or weaker than the forward and
backward linkages? By adding an additional centrifugal force, how-
ever, we become concerned not only with the direction but with the
strength of the forces generated in manufacturing. Even if manufactur-
ing on net creates a force for agglomeration, is it strong enough to do
the job? We see that the answer is yes, for appropriate values of trans-
port costs.
   The role of agricultural transport costs in acting as a brake on ur-
ban development is well documented (the ”tyranny of distance,” as
Agricultural Transport Costs                                          111


Bairoch (1988) calls it). By enlarging our model to include agricultural
transport costs, we capture this effect, and have also been able to dem-
onstrate how reducing agricultural transport costs can cause agglomer-
ation to occur, just as can a reduction in manufacturing transport costs.
Adding costs of transporting agricultural goods not only reminds us
that these costs themselves may play an important role in shaping the
economy’s spatial structure, it also leads us to conclude that the effects
of the gradual abolition of distance-of declining transport costs-
need not be monotonic: An initial decline in transport costs may foster
concentration of activity, then a further decline may dissolve that very
concentration. We will see that this insight allows us to tell some very
interesting stories about the global economy in part 111.

Appendix 7.1: Symmetry Breaking

We want to find the effect of a change d h on the symmetric equilibrium.
We compute terms for the model with agricultural product differentia-
tion, then specialize this for the case of homogeneous agricultural
output .
   Totally differentiating the equilibrium around the symmetric point
in a manner analogous to chapter 5 gives:

[From (7.1)]: dY = p d h + E d w M + -dwd4.                        (7A.1)
                           2           2

[From (7,3)]: d G
              -   M- 2 z dh + ZdzuM.
                    ____                                           (7A.2)
               GM 1 - 0

                                        dG
[From (7.5)]: o d w M = 2ZdY + ( O - 1)Z-                          (7A.3)
                                          GM
Turning to agriculture, we define 6 analogously to Z as
      1 - (TA)’-q - 1 - ( 7 - A ) I - q
                  -                                               (7A.4)
                    1 + (TA)’-V
[ E
       2(GA)’-q
(which also defines the symmetric equilibrium value of G d 4 ) .
                                                             The vari-
able [ ranges from 0, when T A = 1, to 1, when  -+ or when r\ -+
                                                T   d   4   00        00.


From (7.14) we get

dG
~- A - 6dzuA                                                      (7A.5)
 GA
112                                                           Chapter 7


and from (7.16),
                         dGA
r\d7uA = 25dY + (q - 1 ) < 7 .                                    (7A.6)
                         G
These equations implicitly give values of the five endogenous vari-
ables, AY, dGA,d7uM,dGA and dzuA in terms of the exogenous variable,
the change dh. We solve them by a lengthy process of substitution.
  First, we use (7A.5) to eliminate d G A / G Afrom (7A.6) giving
d-7-~ " - 2(1 - b )
                                                                  (7A.7)
 dY        1 - p '

where it is convenient to introduce the constant b, defined as

                                                                  (7A.8)

Notice that b lies in the interval 1 (when 5 = 0) to p (when C, = 1).The
case of homogenous agriculture arises as q -+ 00, so 5 -+ 1, b -+ p, and
dzoA/dY = 2, as discussed in section 7.3.
  We can now solve for the manufacturing variables. Using (7A.7) in
(7A.1), dY is

bdY = p d h + pd7uM,                                              (7A.9)
              2
and eliminating dY from (7A.3) gives,

                + (1 - 0 ) Z -dGM = 2 2 d h .                    (7A.10)
                               GM      b
Equations (7A.2) and (7A.10) can be expressed as




[:    0 - Zp/b
           -z
         1-0

from which
                      I               2z dh
                                     1-0

                                     '"
                                    b(1 - 0)
                                            dh
                                                                 (7A.11)




                          I-   1

dGM
_   _- d h _ 2 0- Z ~                                            (7A.12)
 GM      A (1 - o ) ~
Agricultural Transport Costs                                            113

                     r      1



                                                                   (7A.13)

with the determinant, A, given by

                                                                   (7A.14)

Since b 2 p, A 5 0 for Z E [0, 11.
  Substituting back into (7A.9), we obtain d Y ,

d Y = d-h-p O ( 1 - Z’)                                            (7A.15)
       A b 1 - 0 ’

and hence, from (7A.7),

                                                                   (7A.16)

and from (7A.5):
d G A - d h c p ( 1 - b)20(1 - Z’)
                                                                   (7A.17)
 GA     A b ( l - p)      1- o

  These equations give the explicit expressions we need for the
changes in endogenous variables induced by change d h . Notice that
when T A = 1 and hence b = 1, they reduce to the same expressions as
in the appendix to chapter 5.

1. Homogenous Agriculture (Section 7.3):
Differentiating the real wage equations, (7.7) and (7.8), gives
                    dGM
(GM)’dw = dloM - j ~ - - (1 - p)dwA.                               (7A.18)
                    GM
Substituting terms in (7A.18)and using the fact that as q +-, b -+p, gives,
    d o 2(1 - Z)
A(GM)’K=
              (1 - 0)’
                                                                   (7A.19)
              x [Z(1 - 0)- pz - (1 - jl)O(l - O)(1 + Z ) ] .
Replacing o by 0 = 1/ (1 - p), this becomes

                                                                   (7A.20)
114                                                              Chapter 7


Because A < 0, the condition p > p ensures that d o / d h 5 0 for all
Z in the economically relevant interval, Z E (0,l). Symmetry is never
broken.

2. Differentiated Agriculture (Section 7.4):
From the real wage equation (7.18),

                                                                   (7A.21)

Substituting,

A ( G " ' ) ' ( G A ) 'd- "oE=
                                               + b) - 11 + 2B
                                                                   (7A.22)



B = C,po(o - 1)(1- b ) / b 2 0.                                    (7A.23)
If l, > 0, then d o / d h is negative at Z = 0 and Z = 1 (because A < 0
and b > p).
   To find the break points, set d o / d h = 0. The right-hand side is qua-
dratic in Z.If 6 = 0 (so b = 1 and B = 0), then roots are at Z = 0 and
Z > 0. If C, > 0 and small, then there are two positive real roots. Exam-
ples of these for particular parameter values are given by the BB line
of figure 7.5.

Appendix 7.2: Simulation Parameters

All figures are constructed with p = 0.4, CJ = 5.
Figure 7.1, T A = 1.5.
Figure 7.3, T A = 1.1.
Figure 7.4, T A = 1.5.
Figure 7.5, = 10.
Figure 7.6, q = 10, T A = 1.275.
Agricultural Transport Costs                                                          115


Notes

1. A simulation based investigation of this is contained in Calmette and Le-Pottier 1995.
2. This is the "Armington assumption" employed in many computable equilibrium
trade models (Armington 1969).
3. The limiting case is when the elasticity of substitution is unity, so that each product
has the same share in world income. Relative demands and prices for the two products
are then unvarying, and the corresponding curve in figure 7.4 is the horizontal line at
unity.
4. This can be thought of as a single variety in each region or, more accurately, as a
fixed measure of product varieties.
5. Constructed with the no-black-hole condition, p > p.
This page intentionally left blank
111   The Urban System
This page intentionally left blank
8                                      Spatial Models of Urban
                                       Systems: A Heuristic
                                       Introduction




The dividing line between regional and urban economics is fuzzy at
best. Nonetheless, it seems fair to say that the approach developed in
part I1 felt more like regional than urban economics. For one thing, we
mainly focused on economies with only a small number of discrete
locations, rather than the continuous space that urban modelers usually
assume. Also, the analysis ignored many of the characteristic concerns
of urban economics: For example, how do new cities form? Why do
cities of different size coexist? How do variations in transport cost, nat-
ural or artificial, affect urban location? And of course we entirely ne-
glected that most traditional of urban economists’ concerns, the role
of land-rent gradients in determining location decisions.
   In this part of the book we turn to a series of models that use an
analytical framework very similar to that developed in part 11, but
whose detailed structure differs in ways that allow them to better ad-
dress the issues raised by a focus on cities rather than regions. In partic-
ular, we now work mainly with continuous space, and also introduce
a more realistic treatment of agriculture in which land-rent gradients
play a crucial role.
   This shift of focus offers a different and, we believe, valuable per-
spective on how economies evolve in space. In particular, one gets an
exciting new way of thinking about spatial economics in terms of the
coevolution of two ”landscapes”: the landscape defined by the current
distribution of economic activity, and the implied landscape of ”mar-
ket potential,” which determines the future evolution of that distribu-
tion. Unfortunately, however, these insights come at a cost. Spatial
urban models seem unavoidably to involve more algebraic busywork
than the regional models we have just seen.
   And yet the difficulty of our models in this part of the book seems
to us more a matter of unavoidable but not very significant technical
120                                                             Chapter 8


detail than of deep economic complexity. The basic insights are quite
simple. And before we get into the details it would be helpful to try
to convey a sense of that underlying simplicity.
   In this chapter we attempt to convey this sense by offering a heuristic
approach to the spatial modeling of urban systems. This approach is
in the same spirit as the regional science models described in chapter
3. That is, "heuristic" is a polite way of saying that the approach does
not quite hang together: Neither budget constraints nor market struc-
ture are handled in a way that stands up to close inspection. And yet
we saw in chapter 3 that some deliberate sloppiness can have its uses.
The base-multiplier approach does not bear thinking about too closely,
yet it is a powerful way to introduce some key intuitions about regional
economics, and has even been a useful guide for empirical work; it is
no substitute for the fully worked-out core-periphery model, but it is
a valuable complement (and helps us understand how that more care-
ful model works). We offer here a framework similar both in philoso-
phy and content: an ad hoc, not quite consistent way of thinking about
how producers interdependently choose locations that allows this
chapter to serve as a sort of guide to the more careful analysis that
follows.
   Without further ado, then, let us lay out the framework and look at
the stories it can be used to tell; each of these stories is, in effect, a
preview of the more careful analysis in one of the chapters to come.

8.1 Location Decisions and the Distribution of Demand

Let us imagine an economy in which population and economic activity
are distributed along a line. (In this case, in contrast to the Turing
model described in chapter 6, we make it an ordinary line rather than
a circle.) As in the regional models, the economy produces two kinds
of goods: agricultural products and manufactured goods. Also, again
as in the regional models, agriculture is exogenously and evenly dis-
tributed across space, whereas manufacturing is mobile.' And the man-
ufacturing sector is assumed to consist of many symmetric goods, no
one of which is a significant fraction of the sector.
   At this point, however, we start to cheat. Rather than explicitly mod-
eling the demand for individual manufactured goods, market struc-
ture, and the determination of prices, we blur the issue. We take the
per capita consumption of each manufactured good to be a fixed num-
Spatial Models of Urban Systems: A Heuristic Introduction                121


ber (which we can normalize to 1)-no explicit consideration of price
elasticities. In fact, we do not explicitly introduce prices at all. Instead,
we think of each good as being produced by a monopolist who sites
one or more plants in such a way as to minimize the sum of pro-
duction and transportation costs, given the geographic distribution of
consumption.
   Each manufacturing producer can choose to have as many plants as
he wants; each additional plant, however, involves incurring a fixed
cost F. Production involves a constant marginal cost c, and goods can
be transported at a cost ‘T: per unit good transported one unit of dis-
tance. What units are these costs measured in? We deliberately avoid
saying.
   Finally, we assume that a share p of the population is employed in
manufacturing, and thus that a share p of the demand for each good
comes from manufacturing workers, with the geographical distribu-
tion of manufacturing workers the same as that of manufacturing pro-
duction. This means, of course, that manufacturing firms’ location
decisions are interdependent: The optimal site or sites of production
for each firm depend on where other producers choose to produce.
   With this admittedly very problematic and indeed not quite inter-
nally consistent set of assumptions, let us now examine a series of ex-
amples that can serve as a guide to the issues the next few chapters
raise.

8.2   Sustaining and Locking In Urban Location

What holds a city together? And why are the locations of cities so per-
sistent, even though both individuals and firms continually turn over?
We can get considerable insight into these time-honored questions by
considering one special case of our heuristic approach; this special case
anticipates the more satisfactory approach in chapter 9.
   Consider, then, an economy with a total population normalized to
1 (and thus with the consumption of each manufactured good also
equal to 1)occupying a line of length 1.Farmers, who account for 1 -
of the population and consume 1 - p units of manufacturing, are
spread evenly along this line. Let us also assume that the fixed cost F
is sufficiently high relative to the transport cost that each producer
chooses, regardless of the location of other producers, to have only one
manufacturing facility. In this case, then, we are concerned only with
122                                                            Chapter 8



I                                                 I
0            S                                    1
Figure 8.1
Plant location


the question of where plants are located, not with how many plants
there are.
   One possibility one might imagine is that all manufacturing is con-
centrated at a single urban location, say location r, where r is a number
between 0 and 1. Under what conditions is such a concentration in fact
an equilibrium?*
   Each producer chooses a location-say s-to minimize the sum of
production and transportation costs. As we have described the situa-
tion, however, production costs are the same regardless of the location
chosen (fixed costs are given, and marginal cost is constant). Thus the
problem reduces to one of minimizing transport costs.
   Figure 8.1 illustrates how the total transport costs of a producer lo-
cated at s may be analyzed, given that all other producers are concen-
trated at r. First, a fraction s of the farmers are to the ”west” of the
factory; because their average distance from the factory is s / 2 and
farmers account for the fraction 1 - p of demand, the transportation
costs to this group are (1 - p)ts*/2. Similarly, the cost of shipping to
the farmers to the ”east” is (1 - p)z(l - ~ ) ~ / 2 .  Finally, the urban
consumers in the city consume p units and lie at a distance Ir - s l
away; so the cost of serving them is pz(r - sI. The total transport cost
is therefore




   Figure 8.2 shows this total transport cost as a function of s for the
parameters z = 0.1, p = 1/3, under the assumption that Y = 0.4-that
is, that there is a city somewhat to the west of the country’s geographi-
cal center. (The figure actually shows miniis the transport cost, so that
the firm chooses the top of the curve rather than the bottom; this is to
stress the analogy with the market potential functions that will be de-
rived in later chapters.) Clearly, in this case the point of minimum
transport cost-the optimal location of a firm choosing where to locate
given the locations of other firms-is at s = 0.4 = Y. That is, each firm
Spatial Models of Urban Systems: A Heuristic Introduction             123



 - TC


  -0.2 .




  -0.4.


                                r)
        '1                      111                         1   s

        0.0      0.2           0.4    0.6     0.8        1.o

Figure 8.2
Location and transport costs


chooses to locate where all the other firms are located, and a city at
Y = 0.4, is therefore an equilibrium geography for this economy.
   Why is such an off-center equilibrium possible? Nothing would be
surprising about an equilibrium city at Y = 0.5, that is, in the center of
the country: Such a central location would minimize the cost of ship-
ping goods to the agricultural population. What makes other equilibria
possible is, of course, the role of the manufacturing sector as a market
for itself, and the consequent incentive for each producer to get close to
other producers: An off-center urban concentration drags the optimal
location for each individual producer off-center as well.
   And yet one might still be surprised by the economy's ability to sus-
tain an off-center city. Imagine starting with a central city, then moving
that city east or west. It is not enough that optimal manufacturing loca-
tions follow that city as it moves; they must follow it all the way. One
might suppose that firms would choose locations that are a compro-
mise between the location that minimizes the cost of shipping to farm-
ers and the one that minimizes the cost of shipping to urban
consumers. If they did, then as the hypothetical city moved off center,
firms would locate somewhere between that city and the center, which
means that an off-center location would not actually be an equilibrium.
In fact, however, within certain limits firms do not compromise: They
choose to be wherever the city is.
124                                                                Chapter 8




        0.0         0.2            0.4   0.6    0.8         1 .o
                                                        r
Figure 8.3
City location and plant location


   Figure 8.3 illustrates this point, using the same parameters as figure
8.2. On the horizontal axis is r, the location of a hypothetical urban
concentration; on the vertical axis is s, the optimal location for an indi-
vidual firm calculated by minimizing (8.1).We see that for a consider-
able range-in fact, from Y = 0.25 to r = 0.75-s = r; that is, the optimal
decision of each firm is to locate at the city, and thus that any geogra-
phy involving a city in that range is an equilibrium.
   The reason for this result lies in the form of equation (8.1), which
implies that there is a cusp in the transport cost function at r-a discon-
tinuity in its derivative. If one imagines gradually moving the location
of a plant eastward, the cost of transporting goods to the urban popula-
tion falls steadily as long as one is approaching from the west, then
abruptly begins rising as soon as one has reached the city and is de-
parting to the east. This discontinuity in the derivative makes locating
right at the city the cost-minimizing decision over a range of different
urban locations.
   This result continues to obtain in more satisfactory models. In the
models developed in the next several chapters, profit maximization
leads firms to choose the maximum of a fairly complex "market poten-
tial" function rather than the minimum of a simple measure of trans-
port cost like (8.1).Nonetheless, an urban concentration normally both
Spatial Models of Urban Systems: A Heuristic Introduction                125


creates a cusp in the market potential function and is sustained by that
cusp, which causes the existing urban location to be that function’s
maximum.
   We can also step slightly outside the formal model here to see that
this analysis at least suggests the reasons why cities persist despite the
continual turnover of individuals and firms. Suppose that you imagine
replacing one of the firms in the city with a new firm, one that may have
a somewhat different market potential function than its predecessor,
perhaps even one that has some bias toward a more or less easterly
location. Nonetheless, its market potential still has a cusp at the city’s
location; and as long as the firm is not too different from the existing
firms, the city thus remains its optimal location.
   Of course, not any city location works. In figure 8.3 we saw that if
one posits a city too far off center, firms do not choose to locate there;
so only a city within a certain range is an equilibrium. We can use the
idea that a city is a cusp’s way of sustaining itself to establish an analyt-
ical expression for that range. Consider the left and right derivatives
of TC with respect to s when s = r: that is, the change in total costs as
one approaches the city from the west and departs to the east. These
are




and




  Suppose that we want to ask whether a city that is west of the center
( r < 0.5) is an equilibrium. We need to be sure that it is not to an
individual firm’s advantage to locate a bit closer to the center, that is,
to be sure that (8.3) is positive. This is true provided that




   Similarly, if the city is east of the center, we need to be sure that it
is not to an individual firm’s advantage to drift a bit to the west; that
is, (8.2) must be negative. This is true if

        1
r<
126                                                            Chapter 8


In the case we have considered, with p = 1/3, the range of possible
city locations is therefore 0.25 < Y < 0.75, which was the result we
found in figure 8.3.
   We have now seen how a city, once in existence, can sustain itself
and lock in its location. But how do we think about the process by
which cities are formed, and about the existence of a system with multi-
ple cities?

8.3 Population Growth and City Formation

In chapter 6 we saw one way to think about the formation of popula-
tion concentrations: Imagine a landscape over which manufacturing is
distributed either randomly or (almost) uniformly, posit some dynam-
ics, and trace out the process by which an organized spatial structure
emerges. This can sometimes be a very helpful way of approaching the
issue. When one thinks about city formation, however, it is neither an
empirically compelling nor, as it turns out, an analytically helpful
approach.
   Instead, an approach already familiar from the urban systems litera-
ture surveyed in chapter 2 works best: Imagine an economy with an
existing city or cities, and allow its population to grow. We can then
consider when and where new cities emerge, using this stylized dy-
namic analysis to bring some order to what might otherwise be a com-
plex taxonomy of possible spatial equilibria.
   To do this properly requires being careful about market structure
and general equilibrium; we provide this analysis in chapter 10. We can
suggest the flavor of that analysis, however, by applying our heuristic
approach.
   Consider, then, an economy with the same basic setup as before,
except that we no longer assume that farmers are evenly distributed
along the whole line of possible locations. Instead, we assume that the
line of possible locations is very long, and that only a part of it-which
we may without loss of generality assume to be the section running
from - S to S-is currently occupied by uniformly distributed farmers.
Let the population density of farmers be d. Let us also assume that
there is already a concentration of all manufacturing at the center of
the occupied zone, at location 0.
   Now let us suppose that the population grows, but that the density
of the agricultural population remains constant, so the agricultural
frontier shifts outward. What happens?
Spatial Models of Urban Systems: A Heuristic Introduction                 127




0          sl2         S                      S
Figure 8.4
Population growth and city formation


   Manufacturing firms always have the option of establishing new
plants somewhere away from the existing city to reduce the cost of
shipment to the agricultural hinterland. Let us proceed in three stages.
First, let us ask where new plants would be located if they were to be
built; then let us ask when it becomes profitable to open such plants;
finally, we can turn to the implications of that process.
   Figure 8.4 shows how a new plant can reduce transportation costs.
It shows the agricultural market to the east of the existing city, from
0 to S.Without a new plant, this entire market will be served from the
existing city. If a new plant is built at location s, however, only farmers
from 0 to s / 2 will be served from that old location; the new plant will
serve farmers from s / 2 to S.
   Where should the plant be located, if it is established? As in the pre-
vious section, this decision is simply a matter of minimizing transport
costs. There are three groups of consumers to take into account, all
farmers to the east of the city. (City residents and farmers to the west
will be served from the old location.) There are s / 2 farmers who will
continue to be served from the old location, at an average distance of
s/4; another s / 2 farmers to the west of the new plant, also at an aver-
age distance of s/4; and (S - s) farmers to the east of the new plant,
at an average distance of (S - s)/2. The total transportation cost is
therefore




The location that minimizes this cost is s = 2s / 3: A new plant, if estab-
lished, should be located two-thirds of the way to the agricultural
frontier.
    Should such a plant be built? Without such a plant, the S farmers
east of the center are an average distance S / 2 from the producer, so
the transport cost is z d S 2 / 2 . With the plant, the average farmer is only
S / 6 from the producer, so the transport cost is z A S 2 / 6 : a reduction of
z d S 2 / 3 . On the other hand, establishing a new plant involves the fixed
cost F. Thus a new plant is built when
128                                                              Chapter 8


.rdS2/3 = F                                                           (8.7)
or when S has reached the critical value


   But the same criterion applies to all firms, and so as soon as S reaches
S*, a new manufacturing center emerges at 2S*/3. (In fact, even if there
are some slight differences among firms, the emergence of a manufac-
turing center increases the size of the market and induces a cascade of
movement.) And this new manufacturing center creates, in its turn, a
cusp in the market potential and thus locks in its own location.
   Now consider a further increase in the population. Again firms have
an incentive to establish new plants as soon as the agricultural frontier
reaches S* beyond the existing cities; and so on. Thus over time a sys-
tem of cities evolves in which the distance from city to city is 2S"/3.
This distance between cities depends in a sensible way on the under-
lying economic parameters. From (8.8) we see that cities are further
apart the larger is F, which we can loosely interpret as a measure
of the importance of economies of scale; cities are closer together the
larger is either the transport cost z or the agricultural population
density d.
   Notice that this analysis illustrates one of the principles we sug-
gested in chapter 1:In the presence of increasing returns and the multi-
ple equilibria that these returns typically imply, a dynamic story is
often a crucial simplifying tool. In this case it offers us an insight into
the relationship between underlying parameters and the sizes and loca-
tions of cities that would be quite difficult to get out of a purely static
analysis.

8.4 Urban Hierarchies

As we pointed out in chapter 3, central-place theory, with its image of
a hierarchy of cities, has played a powerful role in the history of spatial
economic thought. Yet until recently a central-place hierarchy had
never been shown to emerge from a decentralized market process. One
contribution of the approach developed here is that it at least offers
some illustrative examples of how a hierarchy of central places might
develop. Generating such hierarchies remains quite difficult-indeed,
even in this heuristic discussion we will be a little vague-which sug-
gests that the idea of a neat hierarchy of central places may be less
Spatial Models of Urban Systems: A Heuristic Introduction                129


compelling the harder one looks at it. Still, we can at least get a sense
of what a real central-place model might require.
   Imagine that there are now two types of manufacturing, 1 and 2,
employing fractions of the work force p1and p2,respectively. Suppose
that the parameters of these industries differ in such a way that the
S*-the distance of the agricultural frontier at which it becomes worth-
while to set up a new plant-is several times as large for 2 as it is for
1. And suppose also that we begin with all manufacturing concentrated
in a single city, then allow the population to grow.
   What presumably happens is that when new cities form, they ini-
tially contain only the ”lower level” industry 1. And as the agricultural
frontier shifts outward, several ”type 1” cities form before it becomes
profitable for industry 2 firms to establish new plants.
   When it does become profitable for industry 2 to establish new
plants, however, it is not only to serve the agricultural population but
also to get closer to the workers in these type 1 cities. And the pre-
existing type 1 cities generate cusps in the market potential function
for industry 2, making it likely (though not certain) that when industry
2 firms establish new plants, they do so in a location that already con-
tains a concentration of type 1 firms. Thus we have a process in which
population growth generates a pattern of several small cities con-
taining only industry 1, followed by a larger city that contains both
industries, followed by several more small cities, and so on. In short,
the economy evolves a central-place hierarchy.
   There is no reason to limit this story to two industries. Indeed,
in chapter 11, we show an example of a three-level central-place
hierarchy.

8.5 Ports and Transportation Hubs

It is obvious to even casual observation that although there may be
considerable arbitrariness about urban location, many of the world’s
largest cities do benefit from some special natural advantage-above
all, from the presence of a good harbor or access to a major waterway.
We would like to be able to explain in a formal way why ports and
transportation hubs tend to become urban centers; this can be done
quite easily using the approach developed here.
   To see why big cities tend to be ports, consider the stylized represen-
tation of the role of a transportation hub shown in figure 8.5. Here we
assume that the economy is a line, but with a split in it at the point b, so
130                                                             Chapter 8




                                 J
Figure 8.5
Ports and hubs


that there is potential farmland along both the northern and southern
”branches” of the economy, and this land is occupied up to points S,
equidistant from 0.3Let us suppose for the sake of argument that there
is already a city at point 0, and ask where the next city appears as the
population grows.
   It is immediately clear that the junction point b has special advan-
tages over other possible locations. Imagine calculating how the total
transportation costs for a firm with an existing factory at 0 would vary
as we shifted the location of a second factory steadily to the right. Ini-
tially, as we moved eastward from 0 the cost of shipping to farmers
to the left would steadily rise, while that of shipping to farmers to the
east-which includes both branches-would steadily fall. However,
when we passed point b and moved the location along either branch,
the cost of shipping to farmers on the other branch would be rising.
Thus the junction point offers a cusp in the total transport cost curve,
similar to that produced by a city.
   The firms’ transport costs can be expressed as

TC=zd
          [:-’ + -   (’   -
                          2
                              + (S - b)           2

This adds to the previous expression, (8.6), the transport costs in-
curred on the sales of the S - b farmers on the new branch. Their
average distance from the junction is (S - b ) / 2 , and the junction is
J b - s l away from the plant. The left- and right-hand derivatives of
this are,

fors < b, - -                                                       (8.10)
          as
Spatial Models of Urban Systems: A Heuristic Introduction               131


and

fors > b,   - - .r;d
             as
                        ($ b ) ,
                            -                                         (8.11)

The first of these derivatives is less than the second (unless the junction
is on the very edge of the occupied area and so has no land beyond
it), implying that the junction point is a cusp. Furthermore, the second
(for s > b) is positive, establishing that it does not minimize costs to
establish the plant to the right of the junction. The first of the deriva-
tives is negative for all s 5 b if b < 4S/5. This means that if the junction
is less than 80 percent of the way to the edge of the occupied area, then
the cost-minimizing location is the junction. Only if this condition is
violated, so the junction is close to S, will it minimize costs to build at
a point other than the junction.
   We see, then, that the junction point is a relatively likely place for
a new city to become established. Whereas any other potential site
for a new city would emerge only for very specific parameters-
that is, would be chosen only for a set of measure 0 in parameter
space-the junction emerges as the city site for a considerable range
of parameters.

8.6   Conclusions

We have offered in this chapter a sort of teaser on the application of
our basic approach to the existence and formation of cities. We have
used a heuristic approach, one that does not quite work in terms of
either maximization or equilibrium, to suggest why cities can exist
(firms locate at a cusp in the market potential function created by a
concentration of other firms), how they form (a growing and hence
spreading agricultural population eventually makes it advantageous
for individual producers to establish new city sites, which then be-
come locked in via the creation of a new cusp), why cities may form a
hierarchy (differences in transport costs and scale economies among
goods can produce cities of different order), and how natural advan-
tages such as the existence of harbors can catalyze the formation of
cities (by creating natural cusps in market potential). The next step
is to make good on those coming attractions by delivering on the de-
tails, beginning with a model of a single, isolated city: von Thunen
revisited.
132                                                                       Chapter 8


Notes

1. In the models developed in the rest of part 111, we actually allow farmers to move,
and therefore allow the location of agricultural production to be endogenous. For the
purposes of this chapter, however, we leave this piece of realism on one side.
2. We do not yet consider how such a concentration might arise in the first place. One
answer was given in the Turing analysis in chapter 6; another answer is given below.
3. We also assume that 2b > S, so that if a plant is established anywhere beyond b, it
minimizes cost for the plant to supply consumers along both branches of the economy.
9                                          The Monocentric Economy




If you want an example of how a great economist can use stark simpli-
fication to get at the essence of an issue, it is hard to beat the opening
paragraph of von Thiinen’s classic The Zsolated State:
Imagine a very large town, at the centre of a fertile plain which is crossed by
no navigable river or canal. Throughout the plain the soil is capable of cultiva-
tion and of the same fertility. Far from the town, the plain turns into an unculti-
vated wilderness which cuts off all communication between this state and the
outside world. There are no other towns on the plain. The central town must
therefore supply the rural areas with all manufactured products, and in return
it will obtain all its provisions from the surrounding countryside.’

From this beginning, von Thiinen developed his classic model of the
joint determination of land use and land rent. Countless variants of
this model have appeared since then.*However, for all its variety, this
literature simply assumes a crucial feature of the situation: the concen-
tration of manufacturing in the central city. To our knowledge there
has never been a version of the von Thiinen model that simultaneously
derives the existence of the central city and the pattern of land use. In
this chapter we aim to remedy that neglect.
   There are several reasons for doing this. One, of course, is simply to
fill in a gap in the history of thought. But there are other reasons as
well. Although our eventual goal is to go beyond monocentric geogra-
phies to investigate systems of cities, the monocentric case offers us
the opportunity to develop our analytical tools in a relatively simple
context. Moreover, we will see in later chapters that it is helpful to
think of multicity systems as emerging from an imaginary history in
which a growing economy adds cities over time; the starting point for
such a history must, obviously, be an economy with only one city.
   The underlying structure of this chapter’s model is closely re-
lated to that of the models in part 11. The economy has two sectors,
134                                                                Chapter 9


agriculture and manufacturing, where the former provides a single,
homogeneous good, and the latter supplies a continuum of differenti-
ated goods. As before, centripetal forces emerge from the interaction
among scale economies, transport costs, and factor mobility. The main
modification we make is to change the definitions of factors. We now
assume that all workers in the economy are homogeneous, can move
freely, and can work either in agriculture or in manufacturing. Then
to introduce a new immobile factor that creates centrifugal forces, we
introduce a second factor, land, used in agricultural production. This
allows us to follow the spirit of the von Thunen model by introducing
a land market. And for the whole of part 111, we work only with models
of continuous space.
   How do we analyze location in continuous space? As we will see,
                                                          similar in spirit to
the key concept is that of a iiznrkef ~ofeizfinlfziizcfiorz,
though different in detail from those considered by Harris (1954) and
other pioneers.
   The main question we ask in this chapter is when, if ever, a von
Thunen- type geography, in which all manufactured goods are pro-
duced in a single city, is in fact an equilibrium. We will see that given
our usual restrictions on parameters, a monocentric geography is sus-
tainable only if the population is less than some critical value. This
insight serves as the basis for our treatment of multiple-city systems
in later chapters.'

9.1 The Model

We consider a long, narrow economy -effectively one-dimensional-
that stretches sufficiently far that we can disregard boundary condi-
tions. Along this line lies land of homogeneous quality, with one unit
of land per unit distance. The economy is also endowed with a labor
force of N workers, who in this model (unlike the models of part 11)
are free to choose both the location and the sector in which they work.
The economy's consumers consist of these workers plus a class of land-
lords, who for simplicity are assumed to live on their landholdings;
that is, land rents are consumed where they are accrued.4Consumers
have the same tastes we assumed in chapter 4.
   The agricultural good is produced using both factors, with fixed pro-
portions: cA units of labor and one unit of land are required to produce
one unit of output. Manufactures production requires only labor; the
technology of manufactures production is the same as in part 11. Fi-
The Monocentric Economy                                               135


 nally, transport costs are the same as in chapter 6: Goods melt away
 at a constant proportional rate per unit distance, so that if one unit of
 A [M] is shipped a distance d, only exp(-rAd) [exp(-r’d)] units actu-
 ally arrive.
    This model generates centrifugal and centripetal forces in much the
 same way that these forces arose in the models of chapters 5-7. Because
 agricultural production requires both land and labor, agricultural
 workers must be spread out along the line; this creates an incentive to
 disperse manufacturing as well, both to be close to the rural market
 and to have access to cheaper agricultural products. On the other hand,
 the incentive to locate close to the market provided by other manufac-
 turing workers (backward linkage) and the supply of manufactured
goods those workers produce (forward linkage), other things being the
same, makes the real income of manufacturing workers higher when
they are close to other manufacturing workers. The tension between
these forces for and against agglomeration drives our results.
   We can immediately guess that when manufactures are sufficiently
differentiated from each other-and when the population of workers
is not too large-centripetal forces are strong enough to outweigh the
centrifugal force of dispersed farmers, allowing the agglomeration of
all manufactures production in a single city. That is, the economy’s
geography can be moizoceiztric. But if manufactures are close substitutes
and /or the population is sufficiently large (and hence the agricultural
hinterland of a monocentric economy would extend very far from the
central city), an individual producer would have an incentive to locate
far away from the city. In that case, a monocentric structure would not
be sustainable, and additional cities would have to emerge. To show
that these guesses are correct, we proceed in two steps. First we posit
a monocentric geography and calculate the spatial distribution of activ-
ity and prices in such a von Thiinen economy. Then we test that geogra-
phy by asking whether any individual manufacturing firm would want
to move away from the assumed agglomeration.
   Before we begin, a few notational points. We continue to normalize
the units in which output and the number of varieties are measured,
as we did in chapter 4. We do not, however, try to normalize the units
in which labor is measured, because we are examining the effects of
changes in the size of the labor force in any case. Also, as in chapter
6, we slightly modify our notation to take account of the continuous-
ness of the assumed space: Instead of denoting location with sub-
scripts-for example, denoting the wage rate at Y as wy-we think of
136                                                             Chapter 9


all variables as functions of continuous location, and thus write wM(r),
where Y is a position along the line.

9.2 The von Thunen Economy

Consider the von Thiinen spatial configuration depicted in figure 9.1.
In this figure, the production of all manufactures is assumed to take
place in a single city; we relabel locations if necessary so as to make
that urban site location 0. The agricultural area extends from -f to f,
where f represents the (endogenous) agricultural frontier. The city ex-
ports manufactures to its agricultural hinterland and imports agricul-
tural goods in return. For the moment, let us simply assume that this is
the economy's spatial structure and use that assumption to determine
equilibrium goods prices, factor prices, and land use.
   Let pA = pA (0) be the price of the agricultural good at the city. Each
location in the agricultural hinterland produces one unit of agricultural
output and exports to the city the surplus over local consumption. Ag-
ricultural transport costs mean that farmers receive a lower price the
farther they are from the city:




      -f                         0                         f
Figure 9.1
Monocentric spatial structure
The Monocentric Economy                                                137


pA(r) = p A e - T A I r t e                                           (9.1)
Let R ( r ) and wA(r)be the land rent and wage rate for agricultural work-
ers at location Y. Rent is the value of output from each unit of land
minus the wage bill for the cA workers needed to farm that land:
~ ( r =) pA(r) - cAwA(r)= pAe-rAlrl
                                 - cAwA(r)

Land rents are 0 at the edge of cultivation, distance f from the city, so




  Both sectors generate income. In the city there are L Mmanufacturing
workers, so income there is the manufacturing wage bill, ruMLh'.Else-
where income is the value of agricultural output, which is simply pA(Y ) .
  Turning to manufacturing, we choose the price of manufactures in
the central location as the numeraire, implying that manufacturing
wages in the city are also unity, by equation (4.30):
p M ( 0 ) = wM(0) = 1.                                                (9.3)
The price index G(r)takes a very simple form because of the assump-
tion that manufacturing occurs only at the central location. Using the
definition of G ( Y )from chapter 4 (equation (4.34)),we have




The existence of manufacturing trade costs means that this index is
increasing as we move to locations farther from the center. We let
G = G(0) denote the price index at the center.
   We now have all the information we need to determine equilibrium
(again, simply assuming for the moment that manufacturing is concen-
trated in the city). We can think of equilibrium as determined by two
conditions: market clearing in the market for agricultural output, and
equality of real wages between farmers and workers. Let us consider
these in turn.
   First, income earned in the city is wMLM;a share 1 - p of that income
is spent on A, so food consumption in the city will be D4 = (1 -
p)zuMLM/pA.Meanwhile, each rural location spends a share 1 - p of
its own income on food, leaving p units to be shipped to the city. Only
fraction e-rAlslof the units shipped from location s arrive at the city, so
138                                                            Chapter 9


the supply of food to the city is S A = 2p epTAlslds. But the urban labor
force is the total labor force less the number of farmers, LM = N - 2 Af,
and the urban wage is unity, wM = 1, so we can summarize the market-
clearing condition for agriculture as a relationship between the number
of farmers and the price of food:




  Equation (9.2) gives us the nominal wage received by the frontier
farmer. His real wage, however, is




whereas the real wage of a worker in the city is


Thus equality of real wages requires that
pA   = CAep(v4+~1fCl),f.
                                                                    (9.8)
   Figure 9.2 shows how the market-clearing condition (9.5) and the
equal-real-wage condition (9.8) determine simultaneously the price of
A and the size of the agricultural hinterland,f. It is immediately appar-
ent that an increase in the population requires, other things equal, a
rise in pAto clear the market; as N increases, the market-clearing curve
shifts up, and in equilibrium the frontier moves out.
   Given relative prices and the allocation of labor between manufac-
turing and agriculture, everything else can be determined. Of particu-
lar interest is the real wage rate (which in equilibrium is common to
all workers). By successive substitutions into the manufacturing real-
wage equation (9.7), we can express that real wage as a function of the
frontier distance f, which is itself monotonically related to the popula-
tion size N:




This relationship is illustrated in figure 9.3, in which curves are con-
structed for several different values of p(= (0- l)/o)while holding
The Monocentric Economy                                               139




PA




Figure 9.2
Determination of the equilibrium pA and f


p constant at 0.5. The main features of these curves can be established
by differentiating (9.9) with respect tof to find that

                                                                   (9.10)

where C is a positive constant.
  This tells us several things. First, if the economy does not obey the
no-black-hole condition that p > p, then dwldfis always positive, and
hence real wages are always increasing in population size. Suppose,
however, that we do impose the no-black-hole condition. Then at low
values offi the slope dw/dfis unambiguously positive, whereas at high
levels it becomes negative. So the relationship between population size
and real wages is an inverted U. (The curves in figure 9.3 bear a more
than coincidental resemblance to that in figure 2.2; in fact, we can view
this analysis as one way to justify Henderson’s assumption of an
inverted-U relationship between city size and the utility of city resi-
dents. Notice, however, that the limit to the city size has been obtained
140                                                            Chapter 9


  0




0.8   -




Figure 9.3
Effect of N and p on real wages o


here in the absence of intra-urban commuting and land use, the
standard explanation given to bound the city.) When the population
increases from a low initial level, the benefits of a larger manufac-
turing sector dominate; but as the population continues to increase,
the disadvantages of an ever more distant agricultural frontier even-
tually prevail. The population size that maximizes real wages behaves
as one might expect: It is greater when manufactures are more differ-
entiated; when the share of manufactures in preferences, p, is larger;
and when transport costs in both sectors are lower.
  We have now set out a version of the classic von Thiinen model. Our
next step is to go beyond the classic treatment and justify the existence
of the city itself.

9.3 The Market Potential Function

So far, we have simply assumed that manufacturing production takes
place exclusively in the city. To claim, however, that this monocentric
configuration is an equilibrium, we must make sure that no firm has
T1-2 Monocentric Economy                                                 141


an incentive to defect from the city. This we can do in the usual way
by looking at the wages that would be paid to manufacturing workers
by a zero-profit firm in some location other than the city. The configu-
ration is sustainable if no location can offer a higher real wage than
the city. It actually turns out to be convenient to work with a monotonic
transformation of the potential real wage; we define the (nrarkef)yoteiz-
tial fitncfion of manufacturing as

                                                                       (9.11)

where o A ( r )is the real wage rate of agricultural workers currently pre-
vailing at each Y (which is also the real wage of manufacturing workers
at the central city), and o'(r) ~ ~ ( r ) G ( v ) - ~ y ~ ( ~is) -the maximum
                                                                   (l-p)
real wage rate that zero-profit manufacturing firms could offer at each
    Because o A ( r )= o'(0), potential is unity in the city. A monocentric
Y . ~
geography is sustainable if and only if
Q ( r ) 5 1 for all Y .                                                (9.12)
that is, there is no alternative location at which zero-profit firms could
offer more than workers are currently making.
  To derive the potential function, we can first rewrite it as

                                                                      (9.13)

This says that, at each location, the ratio of real wages equals the ratio
of nominal wages, and uses the fact that agricultural nominal wages
are w A ( r ) = elprM -(1-p)TAlr.6 We now proceed in much the same way
that we did in developing the core-periphery model in chapter 5. We
need to know the manufacturing wage equation, and this is just the
continuous-space version of (4.35):




To evaluate this, we need the manufacturing price index and the spatial
distribution of income. We already have the price index in (9.4). As for
income, in the city there are LM manufacturing workers, so income is
the manufacturing wage bill, w M L M .Elsewhere income is the value of
agricultural output, which is simply p A ( r ) .So
                                                                                             Chapter 9




 1.1

 1 .l

 1.5
                                           I
                                               I
                                                                                             1
 1 .I

 1.1

 1.O

 0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6                                                         N=4 e l . 3 2 )
0.5                                                        N=3 p1.OS)
0.4      1   1   1   1    1   ,    ,   ,   ,       ,   ,     ,      ,      ,         ,
                                                                                                   r
        0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1              1.2 1.3       1.4       1.5 1.6

Figure 9.4
Potential curves for the monocentric system under various values of N


if Y = 0, Y(r) = w M ( r ) L " ,

and                                                                                                    (9.15)


Using these components, we have all the information needed to derive
the potential function.
   Before we obtain a closed-form expression for the potential function,
let us illustrate its structure by means of numerical simulation. Figure
9.4 illustrates n(u)for a constant set of parameters but several different
population sizes. (We show only the curve for locations to the right of
the city; it is, of course, symmetric for locations to the left).7As we have
argued and the figure illustrates, n(0) must equal 1.Moving away from
the city, we see that market potential at first falls, but may then in-
crease. This reflects the tension between the forward and backward
linkages, on one side, which tend to make locations close to the city
attractive, and the incentive to choose a location protected by distance
from competing firms, on the other.
The Monocentric Economy                                                143


   As long as N is sufficiently low, the potential takes on values less
than unity at all locations other than the city. When this is true, a mono-
centric geography is an equilibrium: At no location could firms break
even and pay a real wage as large as the wage that workers are already
receiving. Increasing the population, however, shifts the market poten-
tial curve upward. At a critical population, N, the potential curve first
touches unity at a location other than the existing city. We call this
point F, the critical distance of the manufacturing sector. It is now
profitable for a manufacturing firm to deviate, destroying the mono-
centric structure.
   Once the monocentric structure is destroyed, some other structure
must take its place. We postpone analysis of this transition, however,
to the following chapter. Instead, let us now turn to looking at the
potential curve in more detail.

9.4 The Potential Function and Sustainability of a City

Our next step is to investigate the potential function analytically. To
do so, we need to evaluate the integral in the wage equation. This re-
quires that we divide the integral into three parts, so the wage equation
(9.14) becomes,




                                                                    (9.16)




Each part of this can be simplified using the definitions of Y ( r ) and
G(r) [equations (9.15) and (9.4)] and then the equilibrium conditions
from section 9.1 to eliminate pA and LM. We also simplify equations
by exploiting the economy's symmetry to define integrals only over
locations to the right of the city. Denoting the four parts on the right-
hand side of (9.16) by A, B, C, and D, we can derive:
A = pe-(U-l)TMr
              I                                                     (9.17)

                                                                    (9.18)
144                                                            Chapter 9




                          f r                                      (9.19)



                          Jo



                                                                   (9.20)


Although these are individually very complex, we find that when we
add the pieces back together we obtain:

[zu"(r)]" = A + B + C + D
                                                                   (9.21)



where the function Y ( r , f ) takes the form


                                                                   (9.22)



The function Y ( r , f )is increasing infand lies between 0 and 1, as can
be seen by noting that r 5 fi and
1 > 1 - e-2(U-I)T'(r-s)   >0                                       (9.23)
for s Ir.
  We can now write the complete potential function (9.13) as




This bears a striking resemblance to the conditions we derived for the
sustainability of a core-periphery geography in earlier chapters (i.e.,
(5.16)and (7.13)),to which it is clearly analogous. The first term on the
right-hand side captures the fact that a firm setting up at location r has
to compensate workers for the cost-of-living difference between Y and
The Monocentric Economy                                                 145


the center: a higher price of manufactures and lower cost of agriculture.
The term (1 + p)/ 2 combines the share of the economy's income at
the city, p, and to the west of it, (1 - p)/2. The first term inside the
square brackets therefore measures the disadvantage that a firm at 10-
cation Y has when selling in the large central market and at locations
to its west. The second term inside the brackets captures sales to the
east of the city, so it must be adjusted according to where Y is located
in this eastern half, and this adjustment is made by the expression
W Y l f ).
   Given this equation for the potential, what can be said about its prop-
erties? First, increases in population shift the potential curve upward.
We have already seen that f is increasing in N.The variable f enters
the potential only through the denominator of Y(r,f), and hence Q(Y)
is increasing in f at every Y # 0. This is illustrated by the shifts in the
potential function shown in figure 9.4.
   Second, how does the potential depend on r, the location of a deviat-
ing firm? It is easy to establish its slope at the city, Y = 0, at which
point R(0) = Y ( 0 , f )= 1. We can derive

d ! ! = o[(l - p)t" - (1 + p ) p P ] .                               (9.25)
  dr
If this is negative, then the gradient of the potential function in the
neighborhood of the city is as illustrated in figure 9.4. That is, the
condition gives a strictly negative slope to the right of the city (and
strictly positive to the left), so that the potential function has a cusp
at the city. (We have already seen the intuition for this cusp in
chapter 8.)
   If (9.25) is positive, a monocentric structure can never be sustainable:
Locations close to the city are able to pay higher wages and attract firms
and workers. This is the case if p is small, so that the manufacturing
employment and income concentrated at the city is small; if p is small,
so that the demand elasticity is low and the loss of sales from being
far away from the city is therefore relatively low, and/or if Z~ is large
compared to tM-as we saw in chapter 7-agricultural trade costs
work against agglomeration.
   This establishes the condition under which the potential slopes down
at the city, a necessary condition for a monocentric geography to be
possible. And of course, if N is very small, so thatfis close to 0, it is
also sufficient: The narrow agricultural hinterland has Q(Y) < 1. Let us
146                                                                                       Chapter 9


Table 9.1
Sustainability of a monocentric equilibrium

(1 - p)t" - (1 + p)pt"' > 0                                         (1 - p)r" - (1 + p ) p " < 0



Never                                                         Always                     For small N



now assume that this condition holds and see what happens at higher
values of N and hencef.
  This is most readily done by looking at the behavior of Q ( r ) as N
and henceftend to infinity. Because the market potential n(r)increases
with5 this linziting curve gives the upper limit of all potential curves,
and we denote it n(r).By evaluating Y(r, -) (see appendix 9.2) and
using the function for the potential, (9.24), we obtain
a(r)=    Ke"(P-P)(T4tTh')r   + (1 - K ) e - I ( ' - P ) ( G   1)pbf-Q,(O)1r
                                                                                              (9.26)
where K is a constant given by

                                                                                              (9.27)

and Qr(0) is the derivative given in equation (9.25). This function is
always positive (as the potential function must always be, although it
is not apparent from writing it this way) and takes value unity at r =
0. Because we are looking just at the case where n,(O) < 0, the function
slopes downward at the origin. And because it is linear in two expo-
nential functions in Y , it has at most one turning point, implying that
n ( r ) attains value greater than unity at some value of r if and only if
it is greater than unity as Y -+W. By inspection of (9.26), the second
exponential term goes to 0 as r -+ -, so the first exponential term-
and hence the no-black-hole condition-determines limiting behavior.
If the no-black-hole condition is satisfied, p > p, then K is positive, and
hence n(r) > 1 for sufficiently large r. The monocentric configuration
therefore becomes unsustainable. But if the no-black-hole condition
does not hold, then G ( Y )is decreasing in r,8 meaning that the monocen-
tric structure is always sustainable: Manufacturing cannot escape from
the black hole of the existing city, however large the population and
agricultural area become.
   Pulling together these results, we can summarize the possibilities as
in table 9.1. In the left-hand column of the table, a monocentric con-
The Monocentric Economy                                                 147


  figuration is never an equilibrium. This is the first case we looked
 at, in which, as we have seen, the potential function increases as we
 move away from the city, meaning that firms certainly move out of
 the city.
     In the two right-hand columns, the potential function decreases as
 we move away from the city, and as N increases the sustainability of
 the monocentric configuration depends on the no-black-hole condition.
 If this condition is violated, p 2 p, then the monocentric configuration
 is always an equilibrium. The no-black-hole condition has already oc-
 curred repeatedly in this book: It is the condition under which an in-
 crease in the number of workers raises their real wage even given fixed
 expenditure (chapter 4), under which a core-periphery pattern neces-
 sarily emerges with or without transport costs on agriculture (chapters
 5 and 7), under which the preferred frequency of the racetrack economy
 is 0 (chapter 6), and for that matter under which real wages in a mono-
 centric economy are strictly increasing in population (section 9.2). In
short, it is the case in which economies of agglomeration are so large
 that nothing can counter them.
    Finally, consider the most interesting case given in the right-hand
column of the table, in which the no-black-hole condition does
hold. In this case, a monocentric geography is an equilibrium whenf
(which is to say N) is sufficiently small. Now, however, growth in this
population eventually undermines that equilibrium, by pushing the
agricultural frontier out far enough to make it profitable for firms to
defect from the central city to serve this ever more remote rural mar-
ket. This is the case illustrated in figure 9.4. There is a critical popula-
tion, &    at
           I,which the potential curve first touches unity at a location
other than the existing city, and we call this location, f , the critical
distance.
    What do we know about the determinants of the critical population
and the critical distance? First, notice that as long as (1 - p ) ~ ”-
(1 + p)pzMis negative, it is never profitable to establish a manufactur-
ing operation in the immediate vicinity of the existing city, so F > 0.
That is, the city always casts an uggloiizertlfioiz shndoiu in its local
hinterland. This shadow also has the effect of locking in the city‘s loca-
tion: The city cannot drift to the left or right, because locations a bit to
either side are strictly inferior to the city itself. Second, it is possible
to show that the higher are agricultural transport costs, r4,the smaller
are the values of both fi and T ; as we saw in chapter 7, agricultural
148                                                                Chapter 9


transport costs make it more difficult to support a concentration of
activity.
   These critical values tell us when and where it first becomes profit-
able to establish manufacturing production outside the existing city.
In the next chapter we turn to looking in detail at the dynamics of city
formation.

Appendix 9.1: On the Definition of the Market Potential Function

To see the connection between the market potential function (9.11) and
the concept of market potential that has been widely used in the tradi-
tional economic geography, it is useful to rewrite (9.11) in another form.
That is, first notice that if a firm locates at Y and charges any mill price,
p , then, using (4.17) in the present context, the firm's total sales are
given by

                                                                      (9A.1)



and hence
                                                                      (9A.2)
where




which is a constant that the firm takes as given. Notice that relation
(9A.2) holds under any value of p . In particular, when the firm faces
the prevailing agricultural wage 7uA(r) there, then p = 7uA(r), by (4.30),
and hence q(r; zuA(r))[~uA(r)]" = cp(r). If the firm faces the zero-profit
wage rate, 7uM(r),then p = 7uM(r)and q(r; zu"(v)) = q* by definition, and
hence q*[zu"(r)]" = cp(r), where q* = p is the zero-profit output level
given by (4.33). Therefore, it follows that

                                                                      (9A.4)

where the last equality holds by the definition of real wage. Thus, by
(9.11), (9A.2), and (9A.3), we can obtain the following relation:
The Monocentric Economy                                                        149




                                                                            (9A.5)




which represents the total sales of the firm (normalized by the zero-
profit output 9*) that can be achieved at each location Y when it pays
the prevailing agricultural wage rate there.
   Recall that in traditional economic geography, the market potential
at each location Y has been defined by equation (3.8). Equation (9A.5)
is apparently a generalization of (3.8), where the former considers two
additional factors of firms' competitiveness, that is, the adverse effect
of the wage rate at the production site (expressed by the term [ Z V ~ ~ ( V ) ] ~ ~ )
and the mildness of competition at each market (expressed by G(s)"-').
(Notice that a higher G(s) implies weaker competition from other firms
in market s.)

Appendix 9.2: The Limit Market Potential Function

To derive (9.27), first let f + 00 in (9.22) and integrate terms to give.

                                                                           (9A.6)

Second, notice that using (9.25) we can express the term 2 ( 0 - 1 ) P -
Z~ as

2 ( 0 - 1)z" - T A = (1 - p)(o - l ) P


                    = o[(l - p ) p P   + (p - l ) ( z A + z')   - n,(o)/o].

Using these in (9.24) gives (9.26).

Notes

1. This quotation is from the English translation of von Thiinen 1826 by Wartenberg
(1966, p. 7).
150                                                                             Chapter 9


2. Recent general equilibrium versions include Samuelson 1983 and Nerlove and Sadka
1991.

3. For comparative static analyses of the monocentric economy, refer to section 5 of Fujita
and Krugman 1995, on which the present chapter is based.
4. In a general equilibrium model with land, the question of where land rents are spent
is a nuisance issue that unfortunately must be dealt with one way or another.
5. Refer to appendix 9.1 for the relation between the function (9.11) and the concept of
market potential in the traditional economic geography.
6. In the city, zu,'(O) = 1, and to hold the real wage the same throughout the agricultural
hinterland, the nominal wage must move inversely to the cost-of-living index, a function
of p"(r) and G ( r ) , equations (9.1) and (9.4), respectively.
7. Figure 9.4 is constructed using the following set of parameters: p = 0.75 (i.e,, (T = 4),
p = 0.5, r4 = 0.8, T" = 1, and c"' = 0.5.
8. Since Q(0) < 0, if p < p, then both exponential terms in (9.26) go to 0 as r + m,
implying that n(r)  must be decreasing in all r (for otherwise it would have more than one
turning point). If p = p, then 0 < K < 1, and O(r) = K + (1 - K)exp[-(1 - p)(o - 1)P
- Q,(O)]r,which is decreasing in all r > 0.
10                                    The Emergence of New
                                      Cities




 In chapter 9 we saw how a von Thiinen-type spatial pattern, with an
 isolated city surrounded by an agricultural hinterland, could sustain
itself once somehow established. But how might a city emerge, and
how do we think about the structure of an economy with multiple
cities? In this chapter we offer an approach that answers these ques-
tions jointly. This jointness might not seem necessary: Why should the
analysis of multiple-city economies proceed in tandem with an analysis
of the process of city formation? But combining the two questions sub-
stantially simplifies our analysis.
   On one side, to discuss the structure of multiple-city economies in
general is to risk becoming lost in an endlessly complex taxonomy.
There are very many equilibria that could be sustained once estab-
lished; only by telling some kind of story about which kinds of equilib-
ria are, in fact, likely to become established can we reduce the
taxonomy to manageable size. On the other side, although it is possi-
ble to imagine a discussion of city formation starting from various
initial conditions-for example, from the hypothetical flat earth that
we use elsewhere in this book-we find it most natural to think of
new cities as emerging as an economy that already has an urban
structure grows over time. This means, however, that our discus-
sion of city formation must necessarily take place in a model of a
multiple-city system.
   In this chapter, then, we take the basic approach set out in chapter
9 and add two new ingredients: gradual population growth over time
and a dynamic adjustment process for the location of urban manufac-
turing. The basic idea is simple. In chapter 9 we saw that (given certain
restrictions on the parameters) a monocentric system is a possible equi-
librium only when the economy’s population is less than some critical
value. Presumably, then, as the population grows beyond that critical
152                                                               Chapter 10


value new cities emerge; when it grows beyond a further critical value,
still more will emerge; and so on.
   To examine how that process might work, we begin this chapter by
introducing an "urban" version of our usual evolutionary adjustment
dynamics. We then turn to the simplest case of city formation: the tran-
sition that occurs when the population of a monocentric city system
exceeds its critical value. Finally, we describe the multiple-city pattern
that emerges as the population continues to grow.

10.1 Adjustment Dynamics and the Stability of the Spatial System

We imagine an economy with two sources of change over time.
First, "extrinsic" dynamics arise from a steady process of popula-
tion growth, which we regard as exogenous. Second, "intrinsic" dy-
namics come into play as workers move toward locations that offer
higher wages, and by so doing in turn alter the wages offered at
different locations. In general we should think of these sources of
change as operating simultaneously. For the sake of simplicity,
however, we instead imagine that the extrinsic change in the econ-
omy moves very slowly compared with the intrinsic adjustment
process. Or to be a bit less cryptic: We think of this economy as
evolving by a sort of two-step process. We start from an equilib-
rium spatial configuration, then increase the population a bit and
hold it there; let the economy settle into a new equilibrium; then
repeat.
   The dynamic process we use for the adjustment of urban popu-
lation is similar to that we used earlier. Let there be K city sites
(existing or new-we will discuss their locations later), with the pop-
ulation of the kth site at a particular date being Lk,(k = 1, 2, . . . , K).'
The total number of these manufacturing workers (city residents)
plus agricultural workers LA sums to the population, N, CkLk+ L,4
= N . Real wages in the kth city are Wk             wp, and the average
real wage in the economy is 0              { L A w A+ C k L k w k } / N ,where
w A is the real wage common to all agricultural workers. We as-
sume that each city's population growth is proportional to the
difference between its real wage and the average in the economy'as
a whole,

L k   = L k ( ~ k- 0), k = 1, 2, . . . , K.                            (10.1)
The Emergence of New Cities                                            153


   Equation (10.1) gives the dynamics of manufacturing worker migra-
tion, but what of agricultural workers? In general, we ought to think of
the dynamic process of location adjustment following each population
increment as involving gradual movement of all workers, both manu-
facturing and agricultural. To do so would, however, raise mathemati-
cal and computational difficulties we prefer not to deal with. So instead
we imagine that the agricultural population moves instantaneously to
equalize agricultural real wages, this giving oA,the real wage common
to all agricultural workers.
   Our choice of which hypothetical new cities to include in the system
may seem arbitrary. We need not agonize over this question, however,
because there are never more than a few interesting potential new cities
to consider.
   To identify these potential new cities, we turn to the market potential
function and back to the analysis of chapter 9. The market potential
Q(Y) is defined exactly as in chapter 9, so

                                                                     (10.2)

Consider an urban system in which one or more cities already exist.
The real wages of all agricultural workers and of all manufacturing
workers in existing cities must be the same, so if a site k is occupied
as a city, then Q ( r ) = 1. If this system is in spatial equilibrium, then
at all other locations Y # k, sZ(r) I1, so there is no other location to
which a small group of workers could move and obtain higher real
wages: The real wage these locations offer are less than that in agricul-
ture or in existing cities.
   But suppose now that population growth has just pushed the poten-
tial curve up to the point where it lies slightly above 1 in some loca-
tions. Then a small group of workers may gain higher wages by
moving to these locations. In short, we can expect new cities to emerge
when and where the market potential curve humps itself above 1.
   To see how this works, let us look at what happens in the simplest
case: when the population of a monocentric system grows to the point
at which monocentricity is no longer sustainable. In the discussion be-
low we always assume, for obvious reasons, that the parameters of the
economy satisfy the conditions
(a)   (1 - p ) -~(1 ~+ p)pzM < 0, and (b)         p < p,            (10.3)
which correspond to the right-hand column of table 9.1.
154                                                               Chapter 10


10.2 From One City to Three

10.2.1   The Location of New Cities

Recall from section 9.3 that when N reaches fi, the potential curve just
hits 1 at the critical distance v", as illustrated in figure 9.4. This implies
that even in the absence of any agglomeration there, this location has
become as attractive as the existing city for the production of manufac-
tures. And this in turn suggests that the relocation of even an arbit-
rarily small number of manufacturing firms from the existing city to
this critical location triggers a positive feedback mechanism of spatial
agglomeration, leading to the growth of a new city at that point-or
rather points, because market potential at -v" is exactly the same as
market potential at v'. It is actually most natural to suppose that when
N reaches its critical value, two new cities emerge, at v' and -v'
respectively.
   This needs a bit of discussion. Under the dynamics that we have
specified, the simultaneous development of cities at both f and - v' may
quite possibly be unstable: If one of these cities gets marginally more
population than the other, then it gets further ahead, so our dyna-
mics might lead us from one city to two, or, more generally, through
asymmetric transitions. In appendix 10.2 we consider explicitly the
dynamics of a general three-city case and show that asymmetric
transitions are quite possible. However, here we restrict ourselves
to the case where the transition is from one city to three, that is,
where two equal-sized "flankers" emerge on either side of the original
center.
   This restriction may be given two justifications. First, it is far simpler
than the general three-city case, yet still gets at the essential economic
insights. Second, although an asymmetric pattern of city emergence is
literally possible given our dynamics, it produces peculiar movements
in the agricultural population. Suppose that a new city emerges on only
one side, say the east, of the initial city. The new two-city economy
moves to an equilibrium in which the two cities are of equal size. But
to support these two cities, the center of gravity of the agricultural
population must suddenly shift, with farmers abandoning large
amounts of land in the west and bringing large amounts in the east
under cultivation. We have not specified our dynamics in such a way
to rule this out, but it does seem unreasonable.
   In any case, for now let us simply assume that the question is
whether and when the economy makes the transition from monocen-
The Emergence of New Cities                                           155


tricity to a symmetric tricentricity, with the new flanking cities located
at ?and -?.

10.2.2    Dynamics and Bifurcation

We want to construct a bifurcation diagram analogous to figure 5.4.
To do this, we first trace out real wages in the flanking cities relative
to wages elsewhere in the economy, as a function of the allocation of
labor among cities (a process analogous to the construction of figures
5.1-5.3). We then use this information to show the structure of stable
and unstable population distributions, and hence construct the bifurca-
tion diagram.
   Let L1 and w1 respectively be the population and the real wage of
workers in the central city, and L2 and o2be those of each flanking
city. Then the dynamics of the economy for given N are described by
i,= L l ( 0 l - "1)
                                                                    (10.4)
L 2   = L2(o2 - 0)'

where

a = (L*Ol + 2L20, + L A O A )
-
                                I                                   (10.5)
                  N
L A = N - L1 - 2L2.                                                 (10.6)
We must then determine the values of wl, 03,and w4 associated with
any given values of L1 and L2 and N.The set of equations that do this
are, as in earlier chapters, the price indices, the wage equations, and
the real-wage equations, but now augmented by an equation giving
the size of the agricultural hinterland. To simplify, we begin with a
special case in which agricultural products can be freely transported,
then turn to the more general case.
  Suppose initially that T~ = 0. Then the agricultural price p,'' is the
same everywhere in the economy. Normalizing so that w1 = 1, the price
index of manufactures at each location s can be obtained, by using
(4.34), as




It is convenient to label the price indices in the city locations G ,
and GZ,
156                                                                                        Chapter 10


G1 = G(0) and               G, = G(F).                                                         (10.8)
Income levels at each location are, for the cities, Y,= Ll, Y2 = zu2L2,
and for each agricultural location r, Y ( r ) = p A . The zero-profit wage
rates for manufacturing workers in each city are (using 4.35) given by

              L,GY-I + 2L2i)u2e(a I)r"liGa-*
                                         2




                       1'
                                                                                               (10.9)
              + YA              e-(a-~~~*'~~tG(s)~-~ds
                            t


        Lle-(O-l)K"fGP-l +                       L2zu2Gy-1(1 + e - 2 ( O - l ) r n ' i )


               1'
                                                                                              (10.10)
        + y"         e-(O       l ) K J i ! l \ - ?I
                 f

where f represents the fringe distance of the agricultural area., Deflat-
ing by the price indices, real income in each city is
031 = G1Yp A   1 ( 1 P),                                                                      (10.11)


Turning to agriculture, the fringe distance is given by full employment
of agricultural workers, of whom there are N - L, - 2L2, occupying
land at density c", so
f = (N - L1 - 2L2)/(2C").                                                                     (10.13)

At the fringe, rent is 0, so the agricultural wage satisfies z u A ( f )= y A / c f l ,
which gives real wages in agriculture,
                           = G(f)-P(p")P/c".
w A = zuA(f)G(f)-P(p"))-"-P)                                                                  (10.14)
Given N, L1, and Lz, the system of equations (10.7)-(10.14) defines the
real wages col, 0 1 2 , and uA,which feed into the dynamics of L1 and L 2
(equation 10.4). The system is too complex to study analytically, but it
yields readily to numerical analysis. For a numerical example, we use
the following set of parameters,
p = 0.75 (i.e., (3 = 4), p = 0.3, x A = 0, x M = 1, and c A = 0.5,                            (10.15)
for which the critical population is fi = 2.57 and the critical distance,
r' = 1.14.
    The Emergence of New Cities                                                                     157




                                  N=3.5
             1
 1.10   y
        t   / \

                            N =2.92                             \
                                                                                                          1




1.05



1 .oo



0.95




0.90                                                                                                      1
0.85         1    ,     1     1         1    .    1         1   1     1     1   ~         1   *     ~         ~   1

    0.0     0.1       0.2         0.3       0.4       0.5       0.6       0.7       0.8       0.9         1.0

                                             h , = 2L,/(L,+ 2L2)

   Figure 10.1
   Curve 0 2 / o ,along the locus a A= 0


      Figure 10.1 illustrates the system's dynamics, and hence the na-
   ture of the bifurcation that occurs as N increases. To illustrate the
   system on a two-dimensional diagram, the figure is constructed in the
   following way. The vertical axis is w2/ml, and the horizontal axis
   represents the share of manufacturing workers in the flanking cities,
   h2 2L2/(L1 + 2L2).3Six curves are given, each corresponding to dif-
   ferent levels of N.The curves are constructed by assigning a number
   of workers L2 to each flanking city, then letting L1 and the number
   of agricultural workers adjust until the agricultural real wage equals
   the average real wage in the economy as a whole, w A = W. Each
   curve gives the real wage in the flanking cities relative to that in the
   center, w2/wl, for the different values of h2 associated with each allo-
   cation L2.
     If w 2 / w 1 = 1, we have a long-run equilibrium." If w2/wl > 1, then,
   from the differential equations (10.4), L2 and h2 are increasing, and
158                                                               Chapter 10


conversely for o2/ o1< 1.Thus the empty circles on the figure illustrate
unstable equilibria, and the solid circles illustrate stable ones, either
interior (02/01   = 1) or edge.
   In figure 10.1, depending on the size of the population, there are
different configurations of equilibria. At population 2.0, there is a
unique equilibrium with no workers in the flanking cities (A2 = 0). This
monocentric geography is a stable equilibrium, because any increase
in h2 (and hence L 2 ) from 0 leaves 02/01     < 1, so h2 moves back to 0.
The same is true for any population less than N = 2.33.
   When the population reaches N = 2.33, a new equilibrium emerges
with workers in the flanking cities, (h, = 0.26), and at N just greater
than this, there are three equilibria (A2 = 0 and h2 slightly greater and
slightly less than 0.26), the middle one of which is unstable. The mono-
centric geography is still a stable equilibrium, as is a three-city system.
Increasing the population further, as N passes through N = 2.52, two
further equilibria appear, one of which is stable and has all manufactur-
ing concentrated in the flanking cities.
   As the population passes through the critical population value, =
2.57, so the original monocentric structure ceases to be an equilibrium.
At fi = 2.57, the monocentric structure (hZ= 0) has 02/01           = 1, but
o2/ olis increasing in h2,so any small deviation of firms and workers
from the central city to flanking cities is profitable and results in a cata-
strophic transition to a three-city equilibrium.
   In the population range 2.57 < N < 2.92, there are three equilibria.
Two of these are stable, one with all three cities occupied, and one with
only the two flanking cities (h2= 1).Finally, above N = 2.92, there is a
unique equilibrium, in which only the two flanking cities are occupied.
   We can summarize the results with the bifurcation diagram in figure
10.2. The horizontal axis of this figure is the total population, N, and
the vertical axis is the share of population in the flanking cities, h2 =
2L2/(L1+ 2L2).The bold solid lines denote stable equilibria, and bold
broken lines unstable ones. Starting at low N, the monocentric config-
uration is the unique (stable) equilibrium. At higher N, a three-city
configuration is a stable equilibrium, although our dynamics provide
no way of reaching it until N.We can view as a version of what we
have been calling the sustain point; once we pass it, concentration of
all manufacturing in the single city can no longer be sustained as an
equilibrium, and the dynamics lead to a three-city equilibrium. How-
ever, given the parameters for which figure 10.2 was drawn, this con-
The Emergence of New Cities                                                                               159



                                                                           2 cities (no center)

                                                                                 J


      1-        3 cities                                               /
0.5




      - monocentric             I
                                    1
                                        I
                                            ,
0.0         1   I      I    I
                                            I   I

                                                    ‘‘1,
                                                           ‘-1,.   I   I     1     I     1        I   I    N
      2.0                               2.5                                             3.0
                                            n=2.57
Figure 10.2
Bifurcation diagram for the three-city system


figuration also becomes unsustainable at a higher value of population,
N = 2.92, and a two-city configuration is reached.
   How general is the configuration illustrated here? First, this diagram
is in a sense incomplete: There may be other equilibria, not shown, in
which there are cities at locations other than F and -F. However, be-
cause F and - F are the first locations at which the market potential
reaches unity, we can be sure that our dynamic process first leads to
this pair of cities, rather than any other. We turn to the possible emer-
gence of additional cities in section 10.3.
   In figures 10.1 and 10.2, the central city disappears at high enough
N, but this is not a general property. In particular, we shall see that once
we allow further cities to develop, these further cities place bounds on
the size of the two flanking cities described here, making it less likely
that the central city is displaced.5
160                                                             Chapter 10


   As for the form of the bifurcation, in appendix 10.1 we establish suf-
ficient conditions under which the bifurcation at fi must be a towzahaiok
(subcritical) bifiircotion, as illustrated in the figures. This happens be-
cause in figure 10.1, when N = N, the w2/w1curve has a positive slope
at h2 = 0; that is, when N = N,along the locus w A = G,

                                                                   (10.16)

Appendix 10.1 establishes sufficient conditions for this inequality to
be satisfied, even in the case in which agricultural transport costs are
positive.
   Finally, what other differences does removing the assumption that
agricultural transport costs are 0 make? When we consider the more
reasonable case in which z” > 0, the analysis becomes considerably
more difficult, because we must determine to which city the agricul-
tural good from each location is being shipped: the flow patteviz of the
agricultural good. The issue here is the following. Suppose that the two
flanking cities are large and the central city quite small. Then agricul-
tural products from land beyond the flanking cities (Irl > IF l ) are all
consumed in the flanking cities, but so also is some of the agricultural
output produced between the central and flanking cities, at locations
Irl < I f l . This means that the agricultural price schedule does not fall
away exponentially from the central city, as we described it in equation
(9.1). It also has peaks in each of the flanking cities.
   Fortunately, this problem does not change the nature of the bifurca-
tion, because the problem depends on the dynamics around L2 = 0, at
which point agricultural demand from flanking cities is so small that
it does not disturb the price schedule. However, in the simulations of
the next section, we have positive agricultural transport costs, so we
have to keep track of agricultural flows and construct agricultural price
functions accordingly.

10.3 Emergence of New Cities in the Long Run

We now extend the analysis beyond three cities to look at a continu-
ing process of population growth and city formation. As population
increases, we keep track of the market potential curve and, when
this reaches unity at a new site, our dynamics cause a new city to be
born.
The Emergence of New Cities                                              161


   Clearly we cannot expect much in the way of analytical results here.
However, although different sets of parameter values generate minor
differences in the result, as long as the two conditions in (10.3) are met,
the long-run evolutionary process of the urban system is qualitatively
the same under any parameter set. We therefore use the same parame-
ter set we used in chapter 9, that is,
p = 0.75 (i.e., o = 4), p = 0.5, r A = 0.8, r M= 1, and ca4 = 0.5,   (10.17)
accompanied by the following critical values:
fi = 4.36, T = 1.10.                                                 (10.18)
   Given those values, figure 10.3 describes how the spatial system
 evolves over time as N increases gradually. We present two series of
diagrams: one showing the land-rent curve, which reflects the current
distribution of economic activity, and the other showing the market
potential curve, which determines the future evolution of that distribu-
tion.'j The coevolution of two curves describes how the spatial system
changes in the long run through a sequence of bifurcations. First, panel
(a,) depicts the potential curve for Y >- 0 associated with the monocen-
tric equilibrium under the initial population size, N = 3, and panel (a,)
shows the associated land-rent curve of the economy. Because Q ( r ) <
1 for all Y # r1 = 0, this monocentric equilibrium is stable.7
   However, as shown in panel (bl),when N reaches the critical value,
4.36 = fi, the potential curve hits 1 at distance 1.10            U' (and at
 - 1.10 = -7); hence the monocentric system becomes unsustainable.
Therefore, we transfer an arbitrarily small number of manufacturing
workers (M-workers) from the existing city (at r1 = 0) to each location,
r2 = 1.10 and Y - ~= -1.10, then set off the adjustment dynamics de-
scribed by (10.1). Panels (c,) and (c2)describe the new (stable) spatial
system that has emerged at the end of this adjustment dynamics. A
comparison of the two land-rent curves in panels (b2)and (c2)indicates
that a catastrophic transformation of the spatial system has occurred
at this bifurcation point. In particular, because the land rent at the loca-
tion of each city is roughly proportional to the city's population,Rpanel
(c2) indicates that the new polztiev city 2 (and frontier city -2) has a
slightly larger population than the original city 1. (In fact, just after the
bifurcation, we have that L, = 0.74 and L2 = L2= 0.97.)
   Panels (d,) and (d,) describe the tricentric system at N = 6, which
is halfway between the first bifurcation and the next bifurcation.
162                                                                                                                            Chapter 10


   n(r)
  Ilr           .     .         .     .




06 *

 0.5      -
0460            .    0.2             04        0'6        08            1.0    IZr
   (a,)Potential curve of monoccntnc equilibrium at N=3                                    (%)Rent curve of monocentric equilibrium at N=3

                                                                                       R(r)
                                                                                     0.8        .    .     .    .    .     .     .    .




0.4

03
      00        02         04       06    08        10   12        14     16   lgr
              (b,)PotcntiaI cunrc of monocentric equilibrium                          (b,)Rent curve of monoccntric equilibrium at N 4 . 3 6
                       at N 4 . 3 6 before bifurcation                                                  before bifurcation
                                                                                                                     .
                                                                                     o y . . - . - . - .. - . - . . . .                        ,



0 3 O)   0 2 0 4 0 6 . 0 8 1'0 1'2 1'4 i 6 - 118'
                                '


   (C,)Potential curve of tricentric equilibrium at N=4 36
                     after bifurcation
               - . - . . . _ . - . -
                                          1.10                                 I



      -
0.6

          0         04              0'8   .   1'224r .   1'6   .    2'0
                                                                        \
(d,)PotentiaI curve of tricentric equilibrium atN=6                                  (QRent curve of tricentric equilibrium a t N 4

Figure 10.3
Evolutionary process of the spatial system
The Emergence of New Cities                                                                                                 163



                                                                         R(r)
                                                                        0.8      - . - . . . - . - . -
         I                    1.10                       2.11       I




  0.6
        !Oi      04       0 8 . 1'2          1'6     2:O    214'
       (e,)Potcntial curve of tricentric quilibrium at N=7.47             (e,)Rent curve of tricentric equilibrium at N=7.47
                           before bifurcation                                               before bifurcation
   W)
  1 . 1 . .           . - . . . - .              .        ,     -
                                                                         R(r)
                        1.10             2.1 1




        (f,)Potcntial curve of 5-city equilibrium at N97.47                   (f3Rent cuwe of 5-city equilibrium atN=7.47
                           aRer bifurcation                                                after bifurcation




0.4

      (g,)Potential curve of 7ci& equilibrium at N-13.625                 (&)Rent curve of 7-city equilibrium at N-13.625
                         before bifurcation                                               before bifurcation
                                                                        R(r)
                                                                1

1 .o

0.9

0.8



      I
0.7

0.6

0.5   I                                          \I
0.4   :        i    2         3        4             i
 (h,)Potentiai curvc of 9-city equilibrium at N=13.625
                                                              Br
                                                                        (h,)Rent curve of %city equilibnurn atN=13.625
                                                                                                                               r

                      after bifurcation                                                 after bifurcation
164                                                               Chapter 10


Panel (d,) indicates that the two frontier cities have become much
larger than city 1 at the center. Next, panel (e,) shows that the second
bifurcation occurs when N = 7.47. At this moment, thefrontier yotezztid
curve has just hit 1 at r2 3 2.11 (and at r2 -2.11), and the spatial
system has become unsustainable again. As indicated by panel (e2),
just before the second bifurcation, each frontier city has a much larger
population than the city at the center ( L 2 / L , = 2.10/0.63 = 3.08). Panels
( f i ) and (f2) describe the five-city spatial system that has emerged just
after the catastrophic bifurcation.
     In a similar manner, as the population N ( t ) increases further, a pair
of new frontier cities emerges periodically as the result of catastrophic
bifurcations of the existing spatial system. Panels (gl)through (h,) in
figure 10.3 describe another example of such a bifurcation, in which a
seven-city system is transformed into a nine-city system when the fron-
tier potential curve on each side hits 1 at r5 = 4.11 and r 5= -4.11,
respectively.
     The panels of figure 10.3 suggest that as the number of cities in-
creases (because of increasing N), the spatial system approaches a
highly regular central place system in which sizes of all cities are
roughly the same. More precisely, as illustrated in panel (h2),the two
frontier cities are always the largest (because no competing city exists
on their outer flank), and the two cities next to them are the smallest
(reflecting the strongest competition from the frontier cities), whereas
the middle cities have almost identical sizes. In particular, we can see
from panel (h,) that
r2 - r1= U' = 1.10,r3 - r2 = 1.01,r4 - r3 = r5 - r4 = rh - r5 = 1.00, (10.19)
which suggests that the distance between each pair of adjacent cities
approaches a constant. Furthermore, if we measure the strength of
the lock-in effect of each city k by the difference between the right-
and left-hand gradients of the market potential at the cusp, R' ( r k ) -
Q:(rk), then the panels indicate that the lock-in effect, too, always
remains at roughly the same value, that is, Rl(rL)- Q:(rk) = 3.80 for
each k, which represents a very sharp cusp in the potential curve at
the location of each city. Therefore, once a city is created at a loca-
tion, it remains there forever, and no new cities emerge in its close
vicinity.'
   Figure 10.4 depicts the market share curve of manufactures pro-
duced by each city k (k = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5) in the nine-city equilibrium at
N = 13.62, which corresponds to the spatial system represented by
The Emergence of New Cities                                             165



market share




Figure 10.4
Market share curves of the nine-city equilibrium at N = 13.62


figure 10.3, panels (h,) and (h2).In figure 10.4, at each consumption
location Y, the market share, M S k ( r ) ,of manufactures produced in city
k (in terms of delivered prices at Y ) can be obtained [by using (4.16)
and (4.30)] as follows:




The figure indicates that with the exception of city 4 (and city -4), each
city imports less than 10 percent of its manufactures consumption from
other cities (mostly from the directly adjacent cities). Because the fron-
tier city 5 is the largest, having no competing city on its outer flank,
it imports the smallest percentage of manufactures from other cities.
Conversely, because city 4 is the smallest (because it is in the shadow
of the frontier city 5), it imports the largest percentage of manufactures.
Notice from these market share curves that the trade pattern of manu-
factured goods realized in our model is different from that of the
classical central place theory a la Christaller and Losch. In the former,
market share curves are bell shaped, having no clear limit to the
distance for trade; in the latter, each city (or central place) has a
clearly defined market area for its goods. This difference arises from
the fact that, in our model, each city produces a group of goods that
166                                                                                           Chapter 10


                                                                     0
  Nk




                                                                          ..- -
                                                                                ---
                                                                OS
                                                                                                       '

                                                                04                              ---
                                                                                           -2 zfmono

                                                                03

                                                                02

                                                                01



                    (a) City size                                          (b) Real wage
TRLR                                                             sw
40     .   .    .     .    .        .   .   .           .
                                                    /       '
36,                                             /           '
                                            /
32,
28 '
24.
20 '




               (c) Total real land rent                                  (d) Social welfare

                    Figure 10.5. Summary measures of the evolutionary process.




are differentiated from other cities' goods, whereas in the classical
central-place theory the same order of cities produce the same nondif-
ferentiated goods. '"
   Figure 10.5 summarizes the evolutionary process. Panel (a) depicts
the changes in the city size distribution along the evolutionary path.
We can see that a new frontier city (more precisely, a pair of new
frontier cities) is created periodically as a result of catastrophic bifur-
cation of the existing spatial system, and that the new frontier city
is always the largest and grows fastest; but it becomes the smallest
when the next new frontier city appears adjacent to it. For example,
we can see in panel (a) that at N = 7.47, city 3 emerges as the new
frontier city, and it remains the largest and grows fastest until N =
10.52, at which point the next new frontier city, city 4, appears as a
result of a catastrophic bifurcation. The diagram also indicates that
in the long run, as the number of cities increases, most cities (except
the frontier city and its adjacent city) have approximately the same
size.
The Emergence of New Cities                                            167


   Next, panel (b) depicts the associated cyclical change in the equilib-
rium real wage of workers, and shows that the real wage declines
through time, but then jumps discontinuously upward when the peri-
odic creation of new frontier cities enables the economy to overcome
the diseconomies of population increase, maintaining a constant real
wage in the long run. It is interesting to compare this with the broken
curve, which represents the equilibrium real wage that workers would
achieve if the economy were forced to remain monocentric.
   Panel (c) depicts the cyclical change in the total real land rent (TRLR)
defined by
           ft
TRLR = 2        R(r)G(r)~~[pA(v)]-('-~)dr.                         (10.21)
           JO

Not surprisingly, each TRLR curve in panel (c) (the solid line for the
actual spatial systern and the broken one for the base case of the mono-
centric economy) exhibits the opposite trend to the corresponding
curve in panel (b).Finally, if we define the overall social welfare of the
economy by
SW = No + TRLR,                                                    (10.22)
then the solid line in panel (d) shows that the social welfare is increas-
ing almost proportionally with the population N.If we compare this
curve with the broken line (for the monocentric case) in the same panel,
we can understand that the periodic creation of new frontier cities
sustains constant returns in the economy's overall performance in the
long run.

10.4 Conclusions

In this chapter we have, in effect, tried to integrate von Thiinen with
Losch: We have taken the framework that allowed us to give a micro-
foundation for the von Thunen model in chapter 9 and showed how,
in the face of a growing population, that model evolves a system of
central places. This evolution reflects the same logic that determined
outcomes in the regional models of chapters 5-7: the tension between
the centripetal forces created by backward and forward linkages, and
the centrifugal force created by immobile land. And our simulations
suggest that as the population grows, the distance between cities tends
to approach a constant, determined by the relative strength of centripe-
tal and centrifugal forces.
168                                                             Chapter 10


   This multicity model does, we believe, represent a significant exten-
sion of the one-city von Thunen model. Yet it still has one obvious
limitation: In this model all cities are basically the same. They all pro-
duce the same kinds of goods, and once the population becomes suffi-
ciently large, almost all tend to be roughly the same size. Both in the
real world and in the hypothetical world of classical central-place the-
ory, of course, cities have very different sizes and roles. Our next step
is to show that a modification of the model can indeed produce a
Christaller-type urban hierarchy.

Appendix 10.1: Bifurcation with Costly Transport of Agricultural
Goods

We want to establish that when N reaches the critical value fi, the
monocentric equilibrium is transformed to a tricentric system through
a tomahawk bifurcation. This happens because in figure 10.1, when
N = fi, the w2/w1 curve has a positive slope at h2 = 0 (i.e., L2 = 0);
that is, along the locus w A = 0,the inequality (10.16)holds. In this appen-
dix, we obtain sufficient conditions for this inequality to be satisfied in
the general case in which there are positive agricultural transport costs.
Because the analysis is complex, we write down below the main lines of
analysis, leaving the supplementary calculations for appendix 10.2.
   When agricultural transport costs are incorporated, the first problem
is to determine the flow pattern of the agricultural good (A-good). For-
tunately, given that our objective is to examine the dynamics around
L2 = 0, this problem can be solved immediately. That is, given N = fi,
whenever L2 (= L3) is sufficiently small, the consumption of the A-good
in the flanking cities (located at f and - f ) is so small that some amount
of the A-good produced in the flanking agricultural areas (A-areas),
(-5 - f ) and (f,f), is transported to the central city. This implies that
the excess A-good from every agricultural location must be transported
in the direction of the central city; hence, the A-good price curve is
given by the same equation as in (9.1). Thus, replacing p A with p A ( r )
given in (9.1), the previous equilibrium conditions (10.9) through
(10.12) and (10.14) are to be modified respectively as follows:”



                                                                   (lOA.l)
The Emergence of New Cities                                                          169



zu2 =
        i Lle-(U-l)T*ffGy-l


                     f
                         + L2zu2G:-1 (1 + e - 2 ( ( J - 1 ) T h 1 ?
                                                                    1
                                                                                 (10A.2)
            + P A f f e-~,~lsle-(o-l)~*fls-il


0, = G;P(pA)-(*-P),                                                              (10A.3)
w2 = ~ ~ G 2 P ( p A e - r . ~ 7 ) - ( l - P )                                   (10A.4)
wA = G(f)-p(p Ae-rAf)p/CA.                                                       (10A.5)
Equations (10.7), (10.8), and (10.13), however, need no change.
  In (10.16), to evaluate the derivative d ( 0 2 / w 1 ) / d h 2along the lo-
cus w A = CU, after totally differentiating equilibrium equations
(10.7), ( l O . l l ) , (10.12), and (lOA.l) through (10A.5), we let L2 = 0.
Then, as shown in appendix 10.2.a through 10.2.d, we can obtain
that



                                                                        1
                                                                                 (10A.6)
                                                                            I




where
                                                                                 (10A.7)

                                                                                 (1OA.8)




Next, totally differentiating wA = 0 at L2 = 0, as shown in appendix
10.2.e, we can obtain that

             = -2(1      + F ) at L2 = 0,                                       (10A.11)
170                                                         Chapter 10


where

               1+       CL
                      2(0 - 1)       1
                              W2"Z - 1
                                                              (1OA.12)



The substitution of (10A.11) into (10A.6) yields that



                                                              (10A.13)




Since we have, as shown in appendix 10.2.f, that




it follows by (10A.13) that




Because D is always positive (see appendix 10.2.f), if both F and the
quantity inside the braces above are nonnegative, then (10A.15) is non-
negative. Therefore, recalling F by (10A.12), we can conclude that
the relation (10.16) always holds if the following two conditions are
satisfied:

(i) 1 + -----717~"z
             P           2 7/12 *,
         2(0 - 1)
and
The Emergence of New Cities                                                              171

                                                 r                              1




where w 2is given in (lOA.lO). In particular, if zu2 2 1, that is, pz" 2
(1 - p)zA,then condition (i) always holds, and zu2 in the last term of
(ii) is not less than 1. Thus, taking the safe side, we can conclude that
if the following two conditions hold,

(ia) p~~ 2 (1 - p)zA,
and
                              r




                                                                 ,


then we have always the desired result, (10.16).A sufficient condition
to satisfy (iia) is to assume that

p2-        P                                                                        (1OA.16)
         1 + p'
which assures strong multiplier effects through the local consumption
of manufactured goods (M-goods) produced in each city."
   Given that these are only sufficient conditions (which have been ob-
tained after taking the safe side many times), we can conclude that the
relation (10.16) holds in a wide range of parameters in which both p
and z M are not too small. Thus even with costly transportation of ag-
ricultural goods there is still a wide range of parameters for which
population growth eventually implies a catastrophic transition from a
monocentric system to a three-city equilibrium.

Appendix 10.2: Supplementary Calculations for Appendix 10.1

We provide below a series of analyses that supplement appendix 10.1.

20.2.a When N = fi and L2 = 0, the monocentric equilibrium in chap-
ter 9 yields, using (9.14) and (9.16), that
p A   = C A ~ P " " +T'")f,   TO2 5 Z u M ( f ) = w A ( f ) = elPT"'-(1   ~h"llfl   (1 OA.17)
Next, substituting (10.7) and (10.8) into (10A.1) and (10A.2), respec-
tively, and letting L2 = 0, we obtain the following results:
172                                                            Chapter 10



                                                                 (10A.18)


                                                                 (10A.19)

Evaluating (10A.3) through (10A.5) at L2 = 0, we have
                             (p")-(l-rlr at L 2 - 0.
W1 = Lt)? = 0 A = ()-,/p)P'WI)                                   (10A.20)

10.2.6 Again, after the substitution of (10.7) and (10.8) into (lOA.l)
and (10A.2), we take the total derivative of (lOA.l), (10A.2), and
(10.13), and then let L2 = 0. Solving these equations for df, dp" and dzu2,
then simplifying them by using (10A.18) and (10A.19), we can obtain
that
I l y = -(dL,   + 2dL2)/(2c"),                                   (10A.21)



                                                                 (10A.22)




                          n




where D, E , and Z are defined respectively by (10A.8), (10A.9), and
(10A.7).

10.2.c Next, totally differentiating (10A.3), (10A.4), and (10A.5) re-
spectively, then setting L2 = 0, we have that
The Emergence of New Cities                                         173




                                                              (10A.26)


where A is defined in (10A.7).

10.2.d Because h2 = 2L2/(L1 + 2L2), and because o1= o2when L =
0 and N = N, it follows that

                                                              (10A.27)

After substituting (10A.22) and (10A.23) into (10A.24) and (10A.25),
respectively, we set ol= oz.Then, further substituting the results into
(10A.27), we can immediately obtain the relation (10A.6).

20.2.e Because col = o2= w Awhen L2 = 0 and N = fi,the total deriva-
tive of the relation
O A   = 0 = ([L,o,   + 2L*02 + (N - L1 - 2L2)oA1/N)           (10A.28)
at the equilibrium yields that

do1 = d o A .                                                 (10A.29)
Thus, by substituting (10A.24) and (10A.26) into (10A.29) and using
(10A.21) and (10A.22), we can readily derive the relation (10A.11).

20.24 To show that D defined by (10A.8) is positive, first observe that

                                                              (10A.30)
174                                                                  Chapter 10



                                                                          (10A.32)


Hence,




      -   2P
      - -(Li/pA)           'C      [by (10A.18)]                          (10A.33)
         1-v

      - - 2cL
      _         (70y/cI   - e-(u        )
                                   1)Tkfi   [by (10A.19) and (10A.30)],
         I-P
which implies that D defined by (10A.8) is positive. Next, to show the
inequality in (10A.14), we decompose the integral in (10A.9) into two
terms as follows:




and hence, after dividing B2 into the same two parts and rearranging
terms,
The Emergence of New Cities                                              175




                                                                   (1OA .34)




Therefore, by (10A.9),
E = Wy"(L;'/pA)(B'                    + B2)
  < zoz'(L;' / p A ) C A
                                                                   (10A.35)
  = w ; ~ ( w ! /-~ e-('-l)TM')A [by (10A.19) and (10A.30)]

  - (p- Z O ; O e - ( O - l ) T M i
                                        )A/
which means (10A.14).

Appendix 10.3: Adjustment Dynamics of a General Three-City
Case

In section 10.2, we examined the adjustment dynamics of a three-city
economy in which cities are assumed potentially to exist at three loca-
tions, -7, 0, and 7 (where 7 is the critical distance at which the potential
curve of the monocentric economy first reaches unity). In that analysis,
however, we restricted ourselves to the case where two flanking cities
always have the same population. In this appendix, we drop this
restriction and reexamine the adjustment dynamics of the same three-
176                                                             Chapter 10




Figure 10A.1
Stable subset of the three-city system


city economy, including asymmetric transition^.'^ This more general
analysis will provide us with a clearer understanding of how the initial
monocentric system bifurcates to a new configuration. Because of
mathematical complexity, the study is conducted through numerical
analyses. In the numerical study below, we use the same set of parame-
ters given in (10.17), accompanied by those critical numbers in (10.18).
Thus, the locations of the possible three cities, city 1, city 2, and city
-2, are fixed respectively at

y1 = 0, r2 = 7 = 1.10,       and     Y - ~= -7   = -1.10.         (1OA.36)
   In this context of the tricentric system, for each given value of the
total population N, we set K = 3 in (10.1) and solve the adjustment
dynamics (10.1) under every possible initial population distribution
such that L, + L2 + LP2< N.The full representation of the results would
involve phase diagrams in the three-dimensional space, L1 X L2 X L2.
In practice, however, essential results can be represented in two-dimen-
sional diagrams, because for each given value of N, there is a two-
dimensional stable subset in the L1 X L2 X L2space that contains all
possible equilibria (both stable and unstable ones) of the present three-
city system and to which all adjustment paths are directed.14In figure
10A.l, this stable subset is illustrated by a shaded surface, M l M 2 M F 2 .
It follows that to study the transitions of the three-city system in associ-
ation with the total population change, it is sufficient to examine how
the adjustment dynamics on this subset changes with N.Figure 10A.2
presents the results.15
The Emergence of New Cities                                                   177




                                       D4
                                 (b) 1.8<N<2




                                 ( e ) 2.97<N<3.1             ( f ) 3.1< N<4.36=%
                                       MI                            MI




(g) % =4.36<N<5.1               (h) 5.1<N<7.2                     (i) 7.2<N

Figure 10A.2
Phase diagrams of the adjustment dynamics on the stable subsets


   In each phase diagram in Figure 10A.2, solid lines depict all stable
and unstable manifolds, whereas broken lines depict representative
trajectories; furthermore, each filled circle represents a stable equilib-
rium, whereas each open circle represents an unstable equilibrium. In
each panel, the monocentric equilibrium with city k ( k = 1, 2, and -2)
is denoted by M k , which corresponds to the point M Ain figure 10A.2.
The spatial configuration is duocentric along each side of M 1 M 2 M - 2 ,
and it is tricentric in the interior of M 1 M 2 M P 2 .
                                                    We also note that each
phase is symmetric with respect to MID4,because city 2 and city -2
are located symmetrically with respect to city 1.
178                                                                 Chapter 10


   Panel (a) depicts the case of N < 1.8, where only monocentric con-
figurations can be in stable equilibrium. Although there are symmetric
duocentric equilibria at D,, D ; , and D4, and a tricentric equilibrium T1,
all are unstable. Thus, starting from any point in M 1 M 2 M (except ,
those points exactly on the duocentric and tricentric equilibria), the
economy eventually reaches one of the monocentric equilibria. At N =
1.8, new duocentric equilibria D 2 and D3bifurcate from D1,making D1
stable, whereas D 2 and D 3 inherit the instability of D,. Panel (b) shows
the case of 1.8 < N < 2.
   Next, as shown in panel (c), at N = 2, asymmetric duocentric equilib-
ria Ds and 0; bifurcate from D,, making D , stable. A further increase
in N does not change the phase diagram until N = 2.97, at which a new
tricentric equilibrium T2 appears between M , and T,,which further
bifurcates into T2and T , as N increases. This process is shown in panels
(d) and (e).
   A comparison of panels (e) and ( f ) shows that at N = 3.1, T4 and
T ; bifurcate from T3,and T5and T ; from T1.In particular, the emergence
of T4 and T(,      make T3 stable, as shown in panel (f). Now N is large
enough to have a stable tricentric equilibrium, T3. The relative city
sizes, N 2 / N , , at tricentric equilibria T,, T,, and T3are respectively 4.99,
0.02, and 0.66. The dynamics is explained by panel ( f ) until N = 4.36.
   When N reaches the critical size fi = 4.36, major changes in the phase
diagram occur. The comparison of panels ( f ) and (g) shows that at this
critical population size, the two unstable duocentric equilibria, D2 and
D;, and another unstable tricentric equilibrium, T,,merge into M,; un-
stable D1 merges into M,; and unstable 0: merges into M 2, which
makes all three (previously stable) monocentric equilibria, M1,M?,and
M unstable. If the economy has been previously at M 1in panel (f),
for example, then at this critical moment, the potential curve Q ( Y )just
reaches 1 at Y = ?F, which will trigger the formation of new cities at
r‘ and /or -F, as explained previously. Whether one new city or two
new cities emerge at this moment depends on chance. If a similar num-
ber of manufacturing firms happen to be created each at r’ and -r’ si-
multaneously, then a tricentric system is realized. Otherwise, a
duocentric system is realized. Hence, history matters here.
   At N = 5.1, tricentric equilibria T , , T5,and TS merge into duocentric
equilibria D,, Ds, and D;, respectively. For 5.1 < N < 7.2, panel (h)
depicts the phase diagram. Finally, a comparison of panels (h) and (i)
shows that at N > 7.2, the manifold M ,D s [respectively, M ,D ; ] merges
into the manifold M1M7[respectively, M , M ?], with only T, remaining
The Emergence of New Cities                                                                    179



as the stable equilibrium. This indicates, for example, that if the spatial
system previously transformed from M 1to the duocentric equilibrium
D1at N = fi = 4.36, it must be transformed again to a tricentric equilib-
rium T3 at N = 7.2.16Notice that although panel (i) seems to indicate
that the tricentric configuration T3would remain in equilibrium for any
N > 7.2, this is true only if the creation of no additional new city is
considered. Actually, as has been shown in section 10.3, when N
reaches 7.47, the potential curve O ( r ) hits 1 again at Y = 22.11, sug-
gesting the emergence of new cities there.

Notes

1. In a more general situation, the production of manufactures may take place not only
in cities located at discrete locations, but also in a continuum of locations, that is, in an
irzdustrial belt. In this book we look only at discrete cities. For a study of the emergence
of industrial belts, see Mori 1997.
2. In general a polycentric economy can have several agricultural areas, separated by
uncultivated zones. Because we are considering a transition just after the von Thiinen
geography becomes unsustainable, however, we can safely assume that agriculture ex-
tends continuously from -f tof.
3. In figure 10.1, the horizontal axis can be either L2 or h, E 2L2/(LI + 2L2), but we use
h2 for normalization. That is, notice that since i=z  2 ( L I i 2 - L,L,)/(L, + 2L,)', we have:
                  < 1 ) + o2< 0 < w1 + (i,> 0 and i, < O} by (10.1) + i2
(1) (w4= Wand 01/02                                                    < 0,
and

(2) ( w A = 0 and o2/o1> 1 ) + o1< 0 < o2+ {E,< 0 and i, > 0) + h: > 0.
Therefore, along the locus   = 0 we have 5 0 as h2 5 0.
4. Because agricultural real wages equal the average wage in the economy, w" = 0, we
have that o15 0 if and only if o1S OZ.
5. As the next section shows, the introduction of agricultural transport costs also makes
it less likely that the central city is displaced, because the agricultural transport costs
work against enabling the flanking cities to grow excessively.
6. The equilibrium conditions of the spatial economy under any given N can be obtained
by dropping the industry index h from all equations in the first section of chapter 11.
We avoid writing them down here to save space. Refer to appendix 10.3 for a detailed
analysis of the adjustment dynamics of a general three-city economy under the parame-
ter set in (10.17).
7. Using the fact that the supply curve of the agricultural good in figure 9.2 is steeper
than the demand curve at the equilibrium, it can be readily shown that the monocentric
equilibrium is always stable wheri the fornmtion of uo i i m city is m i s i r l m d . Then, because
Q ( r ) < 1 for all r # 0, the monocentric equilibrium depicted in figure 10.3 ( a , ) is stable
even if we consider the possible formation of new cities.
180                                                                            Chapter 10


8. This is true in the same land-rent diagram. However, since the agricultural price in
the city at the farthest right is always normalized to 1 in the present numerical analyses,
the comparison of the absolute values of different land-rent diagrams is not meaningful.
9. More precisely, when the agricultural transport cost, (1 - p)zA,is significantly large,
then no existing city disappears in this evolutionary process. In contrast, when (1 - p)rA
is very small in comparison with VT”, some of existing cities may disappear in the long
run, because when (1 - p)tAis much smaller than p P , the wage rate, zoA(r), becomes
much higher in frontier agricultural locations than at the frontier cities. Hence the labor
cost is always much lower at frontier cities than in their forelands, which delays the
emergence of a new city in either outer flank. This means that before the emergence of
a new city in its foreland, each existing frontier city has a large uncontested market for
its manufactures there, which makes each frontier city very large in comparison with
middle cities. Hence each frontier city may eventually even absorb the middle city 10-
cated directly adjacent.
10. The market area structure assumed in the classical central-place theory, called the
rcurrutrric 1nzu of tirarket nrerrs (LMA), was outlined by Launhardt (1885) and rediscovered
by Fetter (1924). In contrast, the market area structure represented by equation (10.20)
resembles the ln7u of rrtnil grmitafion (LRG), which was proposed by Reilly (1931) as an
empirical regularity. Hence we can consider our model (based on monopolistic competi-
tion with differentiated goods) to provide a theoretical justification for the LRG. Not
surprisingly, expression (10.20) looks like the logit model that has been used in modern
presentation of the LRG (refer to Anderson et al., 1992, chaps. 3 and 4).
11. Although there is no change in ( l O . l l ) , we write it down below for convenience.
12. In combining (A10.16) and (b) in (10.3), we have that p > p 2 p / ( l + p), which
always holds if p > p = 0.5. Notice that condition (a) in (10.3) is always satisfied if (ia)
holds.
13. This part of our study is based on Fujita and Mori 1997
11. Ifzd4 = 7‘‘ = 0, then the equation of this subset is given by L , + L2 + L3 = pN, which
represents the clearance condition of the agricultural market under the assumption of
the costless mobility of all goods. In the present context of positive transport costs, how-
ever, this subset is convex to the origin, located farther from the origin than the L , + L ,
+ L1 = p N plane. This reflects the fact that if the production of manufactures is conducted
on an equal scale in the two cities, for example, then the “average price” of the agricul-
tural good in this duocentric economy is lower than that in the monocentric economy,
which causes more consumption and production of the agricultural good and hence
more agricultural workers in the duocentric economy than in the monocentric economy.
1s. In the stability analysis below, the stability/instability of each equilibrium point is
identified by using the standard method of the linear approximation of the dynamical
system (10.1)at that equilibrium point.
16. Notice that our discussion here is limited to the three-city system. In general, it is
also possible that D is transformed into a quadricentric configuration.
11                                    Evolution of a Hierarchical
                                      Urban System




Chapter 10 showed how an economy could evolve from monocentrism
to a multiple-city geography, but that geography was still a rather un-
interesting one. Because there was assumed to be only one type of man-
ufactured good (albeit in many varieties), all cities were doing pretty
much the same thing and, as we saw, in the long run tended to be of
similar sizes. Yet a major insight both of Henderson-type models and
of Christaller’s central-place theory is that differences in the character-
istics of manufactured goods lead to the evolution of a system in
which cities of different types and sizes each play distinct roles. In this
chapter, we show how an economy with several different manufac-
turing sectors-differing in transport costs, substitution parameters,
or both-can evolve a hierarchical urban system, that is, a system in
which one can make a meaningful distinction between “higher-order”
and ”lower-order” cities: A higher-order city does everything a lower-
order city does, and more.
   Chapter 8 suggested-but only in a heuristic model-the basic
mechanism for the emergence of such a hierarchy. Getting it right, in a
full general equilibrium model with a consistent description of market
structure, is much harder, but we will see that the story remains simi-
lar. Essentially, when firms find it profitable to establish a new location
for the production of ”higher-order goods” (goods having a lower
transport cost and /or a smaller substitution parameter), they tend to
choose an existing lower-order city, because of the backward-linkage
effects of the consumers in such cities; so when a higher-order city
emerges, it normally does so via the ”upgrading” of an existing lower-
order city. Repetition of this process eventually produces an ordered
hierarchy of cities.
   We may note that although the main concern of our study here is
not on the reality of the model, the results obtained in this chapter are
182                                                          Chapter 11


also helpful in understanding the evolutionary process of real-world
urban systems. In particular, the evolutionary process of the hierarchi-
cal urban system simulated in section 11.5 qualitatively resembles the
development process of the U.S. urban system during its westward
expansion in the nineteenth century. To give some sense of this real-
world background, we begin this chapter with a review of some histori-
cal data.

11.1 The Formation of an Urban Hierarchy in Nineteenth-Century
America

Figure 11.1 illustrates the evolution of the U.S. urban system during
the period from 1830 to 1870.' Over this period, the U.S. population
increased threefold from approximately 13 million to 39 million, and




Figure 11.1
Evolution of the U.S. urban system, 1830-1870
Evolution of a Hierarchical Urban System                                183


 there was a major expansion of the agricultural area toward the Great
West,* well beyond Chicago and St. Louis. The figure shows the loca-
tion of cities with a population of more than 30,000 in 1870. These cities
in 1870 are classified into three orders such that New York, indicated
by the largest circle, is the only "first-order" city, with a population of
more than 1.3 million; those cities denoted by a middle-sized circle
represent "second-order'' cities, with population between 130,000 and
 1.3 million, and those cities shown by the smallest circle belong to
the "third-order" class, whose population was between 30,000 and
 130,000.3This same figure also shows how this urban system in 1870
had evolved from that in 1830 by indicating the change in each city's
size-order from 1830 to 1870.4That is, shaded circles denote cities that
were upgraded by one or more orders, circles with a single line denote
those that were downgraded in one or more orders but were still larger
than or equal to the third order, open circles mark those that dropped
out of the third order, and black circles show those that stayed in the
same order as in 1830.
   Figure 11.1 reveals several interesting facts. First, not surpringly,
most cities established before 1830 (except the steel town, Pittsburgh)
were located along the northern part of the Atlantic coast or navigable
rivers, reflecting the importance of waterborne transportation for trade
with Europe as well as within the United States. Second, in the Mid-
west and Great West, a large number of new third-order cities had
emerged by 1870 because of the expansion of the agricultural area to-
ward the Great West resulting from the threefold increase of the U.S.
population between 1830 and 1870. To provide farmers in the spread-
ing agricultural area with ordinary consumption goods and farming
tools, new small cities appeared, each serving a local agricultural hin-
terland. Third, several old third-order cities in the Midwest (such as
St. Louis, Chicago, Cleveland, and Detroit) upgraded themselves to
second-order cities, which were not only larger in population than
third-order cities, but also played the role of regional center by supply-
ing higher-order goods and services (such as business / trade services
and sophisticated farming machines) to larger hinterlandss Fourth, a
previously second-order city, New York, upgraded itself to the unpar-
alleled first-order city of the United States, providing the entire United
States with the highest-order goods and services (such as major finan-
cial services and national newspapers). Finally, we can also see in the
figure that although most cities that existed in 1830 still existed in 1870,
184                                                           Chapter 11


several old frontier cities had disappeared (i.e., their population be-
came smaller than the third-order threshold).
  In short, as the U.S. population increased, a systematic hierarchical
system of cities seems to have established itself.6Nobody planned this
development; it was a classic case of the self-organization of a complex
system.

11.2 The Model

The framework of this chapter’s model is the same as that in the
previous two chapters except that now we have H industries, each
of which ( h = 1, 2, . . . , H ) produces its own range of differentiated
products. Hence the previous utility function (4.1) is now generalized
as


                                                                   (11.1)

where p” is the share of the hth industry in consumption, and M” is
the composite output of industry h [equation (4.2) with p = p’l and
?I = ? 2 ” ] .
   Each of the H industries has exactly the same form as the manufac-
turing sector we have studied until now, although we let the parame-
ters describing each industry vary. Thus, the expenditure shares p” can
vary across industries as can the substitution elasticities (0’’ 1/ (1 -
p”)) and the transport costs, T’I.
   We can characterize equilibrium quite directly using the price indi-
ces, income statements, wage equations, and market potential func-
tions. Consider an economy in which there are K cities located at rA
(k = 1, 2, . . . , K), in the kth of which industry h employment is L i .
The price index for industry h products at location r, G ” ( r )is


                                                                   (11.2)

As before, we denote the value of the price index in city k as G f =
G’~(Y,).Income at agricultural location Y is pA((r), and the size of
the agricultural area we denote IXAl. The full description of agricul-
ture is complex and therefore is relegated to appendix 11.1. The
complexity arises because of the problem of the flow of agricultural
Evolution of a Hierarchical Urban System                                 185


goods, alluded to in chapter 10. The agricultural price function p A ( r )
is not the simple exponential function of (9.1),and furthermore, inter-
vals of the geographical space may be unoccupied, which is why we
denote agriculture area I X AI, possibly less than 2f. As usual, the agricul-
tural wage equals the price of agricultural output at the edge of this
area.
   Income in city k, Yk, may be derived from employment in all manu-
facturing industries, Yk= C , , z u i L ~ ,
                                         and income in each agricultural loca-
tion is p A ( r ) .The wage equation for industry h at location Y is then
             r

             L k                                                       (11.3)




This is just the natural extension of the wage equation, (4.35).
  Real wages in each industry and in agriculture are

                                     IT
d 1 ( u ) = z u ” ( r ) ( p A(r))--CIA
                                         /I
                                               (Gl1(r))-Ph,
                                                                       (11.4)

oA(r)
    = zuA(r)(pA( r ) ) - P A                   (G’l(r))”’f.
                                          /I


This deflates nominal wages by agricultural prices and the price indices
of each industry’s manufactures, using the cost-of-living index dual
to the utility function, (11.1).As before, we denote city k real wages
m i = Oh#).
  To complete characterization of equilibrium, we need three more in-
gredients. Labor market clearing in the economy takes the form

                                                                       (11.5)

Real wages must be equalized in all activities that have positive em-
ployment levels; that is,
  I1   - m A ( r ) = mA       for all h, k, such that Li > 0.          (11.6)
Finally, we have to see if the equilibrium is sustainable, so no firm
should be able to attain a positive profit at any possible location. This
can be checked, as before, by using market potential functions, al-
though we now have a separate function for each industry. As before,
186                                                                      Chapter 11


then, let us define the market potential of each industry h at each loca-
tion r by

                                                                             (11.7)

The equilibrium is sustainable if
Q ” ( r ) 5 1 for all r,                                                     (11.8)
for each industry h = 1, 2, . . . , H . If, for some industry h and some
new location r =     C2”(?”) = 1, then we use the dynamics discussed
                                     ?’I,


in chapter 10 to allow a new city site to develop at P .

11.3 The Monocentric System

As usual, we start from a monocentric configuration. The description
of this is essentially as in chapter 9. The city is centered at r = 0 and
supplied with agricultural products from a hinterland of width 2f.
Equality of supply and demand for agricultural output and the condi-
tion that the real wage is the same for all agricultural workers as it is
for manufacturing workers jointly determine the price of agricultural
goods and the size of this hinterland.
   The presence of multiple industries means that we distinguish be-
tween manufacturing as a whole and individual manufacturing in-
dustries. It is convenient to define pM, the consumption share of
manufactures in aggregate, and Z”, the consumption-weighted average
of manufacturing trade costs:


plLf E     1  H

                    p11 = 1 - p A ,                  and   TM
                                                                1
                                                                Ir
                                                                  p’?”
                                                                             (11.9)
            h =1                                                 PM
We fully restate the equilibrium conditions of the monocentric econ-
omy in appendix 11.2, but for our argument we really need note
only two points. First, because in the monocentric configuration all
manufacturing is located in the urban center, this location has share
p*‘ of the economy’s income. Second, if different industries have dif-
ferent transport costs, then the cost-of-living index now varies with
distance according to the transport cost of agricultural goods and the
consumption-weighted average of different manufacturing trade costs.
Thus the cost-of-living index at r differs from that in the city by factor
 [                          -
     p’l T I l - p A Td4 ]r -   [phf ?>ifp ,4 Ta’i ] r
Evolution of a Hierarchical Urban System                                                                            187


   These observations mean that the potential function for each indus-
try now becomes



                                                                                                                (11.10)




                                                                                                                (11.11)



These equations are as in chapter 9, except for two points. First, they
are industry specific, so elasticities and transport costs are all of the
form <T” and zk,respectively. However, the expenditure shares, p h‘, are
not industry specific; as usual, these give total income levels in the city
and outside it, and so aggregate over manufacturing industries. Sec-
ond, the term outside the square brackets in (11.10) measures, as before,
the difference in the cost of living between location Y and the central
city. Consequently, it contains the consumption-weighted average of
manufacturing transport costs, TM.
   What are the properties of these functions? Their gradient in the
neighborhood of the city is easily found by differentiating to give
dQ’l(O)/dY           = o’”(1- p ) Z A - pM(P                             + pW)].                                (11.12)
Having a negative gradient as we move away from the city (to
the right, increasing v ) is a necessary condition for the monocentric
structure to be sustainable, and this condition must hold for all H
industries.
   As population increases, so the potential functions shift upward (ex-
cept at Y = 0), and it is helpful to look at their limiting values. Con-
structing the limiting potential function for each industry, analogously
to equation (9.26), we obtain
  h (Y )   = K” 011Ip \ I ( T A t rll) p ”l(r .\ + i h f ) ] r
                                          ~




                                                                                                                (1 1.13)
                +     (1 - K k ) e ~ O ~ l [ ( l - p ’ ~ ) p ’ ~ T r ~ t p h ( ~ A + ~ h ) - p ~ ~ (r4+i~~~)-
                                                                                               i2FrOl
                                                                                                0’11
                                                                                                   I
188                                                                                 Chapter 11


Table 11.1
Possibility of a monocentric equilibrium

(1 - p h % ‘ - p”(?“   + p h t ” )> 0 for anyh   (1 - p4‘)t’‘- p “ ( i “ + p ” ~ ” )< O for every h

Never

                                                 for every h               for at least one 11

                                                 Always                    For small N



where K” is a constant given by




and Q!(O) is the derivative given in equation (11.12).
   The behavior of equation (11.13)depends, as in the case of equation
(9.26), on the first exponential term. If the exponent on the first term
in (11.13)is negative, then E”(Y)  decreases in all Y > 0: and if this holds
for all industries, then the monocentric structure is always sustainable.
But if the exponent is positive for any industry (and hence K is also
positive for that industry), then at some value of N the monocentric
structure breaks down.
   Table 11.1 summarizes the results. In the left-hand column, some
industry’s potential curve, Q”(Y),has a positive slope at the edge of
the city, and hence the firms in this industry certainly move out of the
city, meaning that the monocentric system is never an equilibrium. In
the two right-hand columns, all industries’ potentials decrease as we
move away from the city, and as N increases, the sustainability of the
monocentric configuration depends on a variation of the no-black-hole
condition. In the center column, pM(?:”+ T”)/(?:” + 7’’)    2 p ” for every
h, so the limiting potential curve of every industry is below unity for
all r # 0, meaning that the monocentric system is always an equilibrium,
however large N becomes. That is, the centripetal force created by the
agglomeration of all industries at the city is so strong that no new city
can emerge, however large N becomes.
   In the right-hand column, we can be sure that some industries-
those satisfying p M ( ~+A T‘”)/(T” + z”) < p/’-move out of the central
city at some value of N, thereby destroying the monocentric configura-
tion. Let us then assume that every industry’s potential function has
a cusp at the city, then divide industries into two groups according to
Evolution of a Hierarchical Urban System                                189


whether they are in the central or right-hand column. For indus-
tries h Ifi, the potential reaches unity at large enough N (they
are in the right-hand column of table ll.l), whereas for industries
h > fi, the potential never attains unity (they are in the central
column), that is,

                                                                    (11.15)


where 1 5 fi IH .
   Thus far we have examined the behavior of potential curves sepa-
rately for each industry. However, the movements of the potential
curves of all H industries are synchronized through the common pa-
rameter fi the width of the agricultural hinterland, which increases
monotonically with the economy’s population, N.In particular, sup-
pose that the initial value of N is sufficiently small that the economy’s
spatial structure is monocentric. Then as N increases gradually with
time, all industries’ potential curves gradually move upward, as ex-
plained before. In this context, the first new city (or the first pair of
new cities) emerges when the first industry’s potential curve reaches
1 at some new location, r # 0. Therefore, the crucial question is: Which
industry’s potential curve reaches 1 first? One might suspect that an
industry ”spins out” from the city sooner if it has either a high elasticity
of substitution (meaning lower scale economies in equilibrium) or high
transport costs (meaning that it tends to follow the agricultural fron-
tier). And this is indeed the case. In appendix 11.3, we show the
following :
   Suppose that p A ~5A pMZM.Then given any pair of industries, 11 and
g, such that h 5 I? and g 5 fi if


then


where 6 I I = I d n ’ l ( 0 ) / d r ( .
  In general, given a pair of industries, g and h, if px and z.‘ are less
than or equal to phand zh, respectively (and one of them is strictly less),
then we say that g is of higher order than 11. Clearly nothing says that
industries must be rankable by order: An industry could have a low
elasticity of substitution and high transport costs, or vice versa. But
                                                                                 Chapter 11




1.05

                   7=0.3
 1 .oo

 0.95
                                                                                   4.36)
0.90

0.85

0.80

0.75

0.70

0.65

0.60                                                                                    r
    0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6      0.7 0.8   0.9 1.0 1 . 1   1.2   1.3   1.4    1.5

Figure 11.2
Examples of critical potential curves for the monocentric system


if industries can be ranked, and we imagine gradually increasing the
population of a monocentric economy, the potential curve of a lower-
order industry always humps itself above 1 sooner than that of a
higher-order industry.
   Figure 11.2 illustrates the impact of ph on the shape of the critical
potential curve, Qh(r; fib). (The impact of 7" is essentially the same as
that of p".) Three hypothetical industries are shown, with
p l = 0.90 > p 2 = 0.75 > p 3 = 0.20.                                                   (11.18)
All other parameters are fixed as follows:
p A = 0.5, p ' = p 2 = 0.1, p3 = 0.3,
                                                                                        (11.19)
Z~ = 0.8, Z~ = 1 for all h, and c A = 0.5.

Thus industry 3 is of the highest order, and industry 1 is of the lowest
order. We can readily confirm that these parameters satisfy the condi-
tions in (11.15)with H = 2. The associated critical potential curves are
depicted in figure 11.2, and are accompanied by the following critical
values:
Evolution of a Hierarchical Urban System                               191


fi’ = 0.88 < fi’ = 4.36, f’ = 0.40 <f’ = 1.40,
                                                                   (11.20)
 J’ = 0.32 < J 2 = 1.10, and 8’ = 5.5 > 6’ = 1.90 > G3 = 0.25.
Therefore, among the three industries, the critical potential curve of
industry 1 hits 1 first at the nearest location, T’ = 0.32, when the econ-
omy’s population reaches the smallest critical value,        = 0.88.


11.4 Self-Organization toward a Hierarchical System

The discussion in the previous section suggests that the growth of an
economy containing many industries of different orders naturally leads
over time to the formation of a hierarchical urban system. Because of
the complexity of the issue, we cannot offer any analytical confirma-
tion. We can, however, illustrate the point with numerical simulations.
To make our simulation analysis tractable, we choose parameters such
that
 H

                                                                   (11.21)
h=l


which ensures that the spatial structure of the economy remains vzom-
polar; that is, the economy has a unique highest-order city in which all
groups of M-goods are produced.8 Lower-order cities can still emerge,
however; as we will show, they do so through a series of bifurcations
associated with the birth of new cities, relocation and merger of ex-
isting cities, and changes in the industrial compositions of cities. Given
that the long-run evolutionary process of the spatial system is qualita-
tively similar as long as the parameters lie in the right-hand column
of table 11.1and satisfy condition (11.21), in the following we present
the results of a representative simulation example.
   Suppose that the economy has three groups of manufactured goods,
h = 1, 2, 3. We fix parameters at those values specified in (11.18) and
(11.19), which yield the critical values in (11.20). The critical potential
curves of the three M-industries (associated with the monocentric con-
figuration) can be depicted as in figure 11.2. Because (11.IS) and (11.19)
imply that {p’ > p 2 and T’ = T’} and (p’ > p 3 and T~ = T~),as noted
before, M3-industry is of the highest order, M’-industry the second or-
der, and M1-industry the third order.
   We assume that the population size of the economy, N ( t ) , increases
gradually over time and examine the evolutionary process of the
192                                                              Chapter 11


spatial system in the long run. In section 11.4.1, we examine in detail
what happens when N ( t ) reaches the first critical value, f i l . We show
that the process of the emergence of new flanking cities may now be
different from that in the single-order urban system of the previous
chapter. In section 11.4.2, then, we examine the spatial system's long-
run evolutionary process.

21.4.1 From One City to Three

Recall from the discussion at the end of section 11.3 that when N(f) is
sufficiently small ( N ( t )< fi' = 0.88), all three potential curves associ-
ated with the monocentric system are strictly less than 1 everywhere
outside the city at Y = 0. Therefore, the monocentric system is a stable
equilibrium, with all three groups of M-goods being produced exclu-
sively in the single city at Y = 0. However, when N ( t ) reaches the small-
est critical value, fi' = 0.88, the potential curve of M'-industry hits 1
at U' = 0.32 (refer to figure 11.2), resulting in the breakdown of the
monocentric system.'
   A pair of new cities then emerge at r"' and -V' and, for our example,
our dynamics imply that the population of these new cities grows con-
tinuously from 0 as N increases gradually beyond        s'.    Hence, unlike
the previous case of the single-order system in chapter 10, the new
cities emerge in the form of a pitc/Ifork bifirrcntion (i.e., a supercritical
bifurcation). This is because the bifurcation occurs only for industry 1,
and in our example, one industry alone does not create sufficient for-
ward and backward linkages to lead to the discontinuous behavior we
have seen previously. The new cities are completely specialized in the
production of industry 1,as we can check by noting that after the bifur-
cation, the potential curves of M2-and M3-industries are strictly below
1 at Y + 0.
   The fact that we have a pitchfork bifurcation has two implications.
First, as N ( t ) reaches fi', a pair of new cities must be created at U' and
- 7'. Hence unlike before, at this moment there is no room for historical
chance to affect the evolutionary process. (Recall our discussion in
chapter 10 about whether one or two cities would be born as N reached
its critical value.'") Second, during the immediate period after this bi-
furcation time, each frontier city is so small that it lacks enough lock-
in force to stay at the same location. If each frontier city remained at
the same location, then as the agricultural area expanded further, the
potential curve would have a positive gradient on the frontier side of
Evolution of a Hierarchical Urban System                                193


the city, thus violating the location equilibrium condition. Therefore,
for the spatial system to remain in stable equilibrium, each frontier city
moves continuously outward until it gains a sufficient lock-in force.''
   It is worth briefly relating this case to that analyzed in chapter 10
and illustrated in figure 10.1. In that case, at the point where the bifur-
cation took place, wages in the flanking cities were strictly increasing
in the proportion of the manufacturing labor force in the new cities
(w2/w1 increasing in h2 at h2 = 0). But now, as N reaches #*, so
0 2 / w 1 = 1, but is decreasing in h 2 .There is therefore no discontinuous
jump in populations, but further increases in N steadily increase flank-
ing city size. The reason is that when a city is specialized in an industry
having a small expenditure share and a high substitutability (such as
p1 = 0.1 and p' = 0.9), further increases in the size of this industry in
that city generate neither significant forward linkage effects (on the
real income there) nor significant backward linkage effects (through
the local demand increase for that industry's products there), but the
competition among firms intensifies rapidly. (Imagine, for example, the
situation in which many bakery shops appear in a small town.) There-
fore, the size of the industry in each frontier city can grow only gradu-
ally as the local demand for that industry's products increases
gradually in association with the expansion of the agricultural frontier.

11.4.2   Long-Run Evolution

Given the preliminary analysis above, we can now examine how the
spatial system evolves over a longer run. The economy's population
size, N ( t ) , is assumed to increase gradually over time, starting with a
small value less than RI. All other parameters are fixed at those values
specified in (11.18)and (11.19).The result is a simulated history of city
formation, occasional city extinction, and urban upgrading, eventually
producing a hierarchical system. Figures 11.3and 11.4 summarize that
history; the former shows the bifurcations along the way, as N(f) in-
creases from #' = 0.88 to 9.79, whereas the latter depicts the changing
shapes of potential curves along the evolutionary path. It is an intricate
history, but worth tracing out for the insights it gives into the way the
tug of war between centripetal and centrifugal forces can create spatial
structure.
   Recall that there are three possible city types: the highest order, with
all three industries; a middle order, with industries 1 and 2; and the
lowest order, with only industry 1. (Parameters are chosen for industry
       MO
 (I)   0.88     Q 0.32.      I-
(2)    1.23     Q          -0.4 1

(3)      0
       1.37                 0.47
                                                         0 the highest-order city
(4) 1.61 0
                              9.58
                                                         0    a second-order city
(5) 1.84 0                  0 0
                                                              a third-order city
(6) 2.01 0
                                  0.!2

(7)    2.23               0,430     .                    0    a city disappeared

                           029
(8)    2.38    0               . .
                                     0:s
(9)    2.42    @
(10) 2.77
                                           0.?8
(11)   2.87    Q
(12) 3.09      @                         JO
                                                  1.15
(13) 3.43                                  0.
(14) 3.72      0                           0
(15) 3.99      @                           0
(16) 4.35      0                           0
(17) 4.50
                                            .
                                           0
(18) 4.70      0
(19) 5.19      @
                                            .
                                            0




(20) 5.83

(21) 6.25      0                            .
(22) 6.94      0                            .
(33) 7.53      Q
                                            .
                                            0




(24) 7.60      0
(25) 7.90      @                            .
(26) 8.44 0
(27) 8.72 0                                 .
(28) 9.15 0                                 .
(29) 9.76      @                            0




(30) 9.79                                  0


              city I                       4

Figure 11.3
Evolutionary process of the hierarchical urban system
Evolution of a Hierarchical Urban System                                                                                                            195



 n"r>
  1.1      .       .       .       .       .       .       .       .       .   .
                                                                                        nhb>
                                                                                        1.1,         .       .       .       .       .      .          ,


 06.                                                                                    06.

 OS.                                                                                    0.5 '                 - - Odr)
                                                                                                              ---. Odr)
                                                                                        0'40.0      01,     02     03      0:4     05      0'6      0 7r
     (a)Potential curve of monocentric equilibrium at N=O 70                                 (e)Potential curve of tricentric equilibrium at h"l.37




 OS
 04
       005 0 10 0 IS 0 2 0 025 030 035 040 0 4 5 O S O O S l
  (b)Potential curve of monocentric equilibrium at N=O 88                                   (!)Potential curve of tricentric equilibrium at \'=I 37

 Rh(d
           .   .       .       .       .       .           .       .       .   .   ,
                                                                                                                                 0.47 0.58

                                                                                       0.9

                                                                                       0.8

                                                                                       0.7
                                                                                                                          ----
OS                                                                                                           ----- Odl)
                                                                                                                  OdI)
04
        005 0 10 0 I5 020 025 030 035 040 0 4 5 O S O O S S '
      (c)Potcntial curve of tricentric equilibrium at N4.95                                  (g)Potential curve of tricentric equilibrium at ,Y=l 61
n"d
 1 1 , .       .       .       .       .       .       .       .       .




                                                                                       OS



   (d)Potential curve of tricentric equilibrium at "1.23                                     (h)Potential curve of 5-city equilibrium at ,\'=I 61


Figure 11.4
Changes in potential curves along the evolutionary path
196                                                                                                                                         Chapter 11




                                                               8
06.                                                                \

                             --
                                                                       8
05.                               PI(')



O40O 0 1          0'2       i 3   04      05   0'6   07   08   09          1'0'
        (i)Potential curve of 7-city equilibrium at N=2 42                                  (m)Potential curve of 9-city equilibrium a t N 4 60

 Cf(d                                                                             nhW
                                                                                  I I     . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
                                                                                              0.49 0.65 0.98 1.37




                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                  0.51' . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
                                                                                     0 1 0 3 0 5 0 7 0 9 I I 1 3 I 5 17 1 9
        0)Potential curve of 9-city equilibrium at N=2 87                                 (n)Potential curve of 9-city equilibrium at N=4 7


   f      .   .         .     .   . . . . . .




                                                                                                               -
                                                                                        0 1 . 0 3 ' 0 5 ' 0'7 ' 0 9 ' I'I   . 1.3   '   1'5 ' 1.7 ' I 9 ' 2'1'
       (k)Potential CUNK of 9-city equilibrium at N=3.W                                 (o)Potential curve of 9-city equilibrium at N=4 70
n"d                                                                               nh(r)
1 1 . .       . . . . . . . . . .




05.



       (1)Potential curve of 7-city equilibrium at N=3.09                               (p)Potential curve of 11-city equilibrium at N=5 19
Evolution of a Hierarchical Urban System                                                                       197




 (q)Potential curve of 13-city equilibrium atN-7 30        (s)Potential curve of IS-city equilibrium ath 7 90
rfw                                                   n"r>
                                                      I 1

                                                      10

                                                      09

                                                      08

                                                      07

                                                      06

                                                      05                                                       r
                                                            o i 0 3 0 ~ 0 7 0 9 1 1 i 1 i 1 71 9 2 1 2 3 2 5
 (r)Potential curve of 13-city equilibrium atN=7 60    (t)Potential curve of IS-cit) equilibrium at '1 =9 79



3 such that it never leaves the original central city.) In figure 113,given
each population N ( t ) , the economy's associated spatial structure is de-
picted on the horizontal line. (Symmetry in the spatial structure of the
economy means we need only describe its right side). For example,
line 20 in figure 11.3 indicates that when N ( t ) = 5.83, the equilibrium
spatial system contains a unique highest-order city at r = 0, a unique
middle-order city (on the right half of the economy) at r = 1.37, and
four lowest-order cities respectively at Y = 0.49,0.65,0.98, and 1.70; the
right-side A-fringe is at Y = 1.82.
   First, we briefly summarize what we explained in section 11.3.1 in
terms of figures 11.3 and 11.4. As is illustrated in figure 11.4(a), when
N ( t ) is sufficiently small that N(f) < &J* = 0.88, then all three potential
curves associated with the monocentric system are strictly less than 1
everywhere outside the city at Y = 0. Therefore, the monocentric system
is in stable equilibrium, with all three groups of M-goods being pro-
duced exclusively at the (highest-order) city at Y = 0. When N ( t ) reaches
the smallest critical value, fl' = 0.88, as depicted in figure 11.4(b), the
potential curve of industry 1 hits 1 at Y = +F1 = 20.32, resulting in the
emergence of a pair of frontier cities there. Because these frontier cities
198                                                                  Chapter 11


emerge as a result of a continuous bifurcation, during the immediate
period after its birth, each frontier city is so small that it lacks enough
lock-in effect to stay at the same location. This point is illustrated in
figure 11.4(c), which indicates that even when N = 0.95, the slope of
the potential curve of industry 1 at the right edge of the frontier city
is 0. Therefore, as indicated by the dotted curve between lines (1)and
(2) in figure 11.3, in order for the spatial system to remain in stable
spatial equilibrium, the frontier city must move continuously outward
from Y = 0.32 to 0.41 as N ( t ) increases from 0.88 to 1.23. Only when N
reaches 1.23 has the frontier city reached a sufficient size that its lock-
in effect is strong enough to enable the city to remain at the same loca-
tion (refer to panel (d) of figure 11.4).
   Next, as N increases further (beyond 1.23) and hence as the frontier
area keeps expanding, the frontier potential curve moves upward; it
eventually hits 1 at Y = 0.47 when N ( t ) = 1.37 (panel (e) of figure 11.4).
At this moment, as the result of a (small) catastrophic bifurcation, the
existing frontier city at Y = 0.41 relocates to Y = 0.47 (line (3)of figure
11.3and panel ( f ) of figure 11.4). At N ( t ) = 1.61, as a result of a continu-
ous bifurcation, a new frontier city starts growing at Y = 0.58, while
the old frontier city remains at 0.47 (line (4) of figure 11.3 and panels
(g) and (h) of figure 11.4).**The old frontier city, however, is soon ab-
sorbed by the new frontier city and disappears when N reaches 1.84
(line ( 5 ) of figure 11.3).When N reaches 2.01, again as a result of a
continuous bifurcation, a new frontier city starts growing at Y = 0.72,
while the old frontier city remains at 0.58 (line (6) of figure 11.3).Then
after a series of maneuvers involving a creation of another lowest-order
city at Y = 0.43 (line (7) of figure 11.3),and through the merger of two
existing cities, located at r = 0.43 and Y = 0.58, at the new location Y =
0.49 (line (8) of figure 11.3),the lowest-order city at Y = 0.58 eventually
relocates to Y = 0.49. As can be seen in figure 11.3, this lowest-order
city continues to remain at Y = 0.49 thereafter. At N = 2.42, as the result
of another continuous bifurcation, a new frontier city starts growing
at Y = 0.85 (line (9) of figure 11.3 and panel (i) of figure 11.4); at N =
2.77, the old frontier city (at Y = 0.72) relocates to Y = 0.65 (line (10) of
figure 11.3).(As figure 11.3 shows, this lowest-order city continues to
exist at Y = 0.65 thereafter.) Furthermore, at N = 2.87, again as a result
of a continuous bifurcation, a new frontier city starts growing at Y =
0.98 (line (11) of figure 11.3).
   Meanwhile, observe from panels (a) through (j) in figure 11.4 that
the potential curve of industry 2 has been steadily moving upward,
Evolution of a Hierarchical Urban System                                   199



 ah(d
 1.1   -         I            I             1                      1




                                   0.49     0.65            0.85 0.98




       0.0      0.2          0.4          0.6          0.8        1 .O   1.2   r
Figure 11.5
Potential curves of the nine-city equilibrium at N = 3.09


with kinks at the location of existing lowest-order cities. In particular,
as indicated by figure 11.4(k),at N = 3.09, the potential curve of indus-
try 2 first reaches 1 at the location of the frontier city (at r = 0.98).
Hence a lowest-order frontier city becomes transformed into a middle-
order city, producing both M1-goods and M2-goods. This arises be-
cause the demand for M2-goodsamong the workers in the lowest-order
cities bends and pulls upward the industry 2 potential curve. In partic-
ular, because the frontier city has the largest population among all ex-
isting lowest-order cities, the potential curve of industry 2 is most
sharply kinked and uplifted toward the frontier city (refer to panel (k)
of figure 11.4).Consequently, the potential curve of industry 2 reaches
1 first at the frontier city, resulting in the transformation of the frontier
city to a middle-order city. Because this middle-order city has been
created by adding a new industry to the second-order city, it naturally
satisfies the hierarchical principle of Christaller (1933).13
   Figure 11.5demonstrates the strength of the demand pull of existing
third-order cities on the shape of the potential curves of higher-order
industries. This figure is an enlargement of figure 11.4(k),with addition
of a new curve, Q 2 ( r ) of mono, which represents the potential curve
of industry 2 associated with the hypothetical monocentric urban
200                                                             Chapter 11


system (in which all M-firms are forced to locate in the city at r = 0)
under the same population, N = 3.09. We can see from this figure that
the demand of workers in the existing lowest-order cities (in particular,
the demand of the large lowest-order city located at the frontier, Y =
0.98) has pulled the potential curve of industry 2 up greatly.
   Returning to the narrative description of figures 11.3 and 11.4, the
frontier city at r = 0.98 is transformed to a middle-order city as the
result of a continuous bifurcation. However, because it grows rapidly,
it soon absorbs the nearby lowest-order city at r = 0.85 (panel (1) of
figure 11.4). As N increases further (beyond 3.10), the frontier area ex-
pands, and a new frontier city starts growing at r = 1.15 when N
reaches 3.43 (line (13)of figure 11.3).However, in comparison with the
middle-order city at r = 0.98, this new frontier city is too small to gather
a sufficient lock-in effect there. Hence, as the frontier area further ex-
pands, the frontier city keeps relocating (discretely) until it settles
down at r = 1.37 (lines (13) to (17) of figure 11.3).
   Observe in figure 11.4(m) that as N increases further, the potential
curve of industry 2 has been gradually moving upward again in the
frontier area. In particular, as shown in figure 11.4(n), at N = 4.70, the
potential curve of industry 2 reaches 1 again at the location of the fron-
tier city ( r = 1.37). At this moment, the existing middle-order city (at
r = 0.98) becomes less attractive for industry 2 (than the frontier city).
Hence, as a consequence of a large catastrophic bifurcation, the whole
of industry 2 at Y = 0.98 moves to the frontier city, degrading the past
middle-order city at r = 0.98 to a lowest-order city while upgrading
the frontier city to a middle-order city (line (18)of figure 11.3 and pan-
els (n) and (0)of figure 11.4).We can see in figure 11.3that this change
in size-order has stabilized the spatial structure in the area between
the central city (at r = 0) and the new middle-order city (at r = 1.37).
In the frontier area, however, the spatial structure keeps changing
(lines (19) to (25) of figure 11.3 and panels (p) through (r) of figure
11.4). In particular, when N reaches 7.60, the frontier city at r = 1.92
is upgraded to a middle-order city. Thus, two middle-order cities now
exist (in the right side of r = 0), with a lowest-order city locating in
the middle (line (24) of figure 11.3 and panel (r) of figure 11.4). After
the formation of this middle-order city at r = 1.92, the spatial configu-
ration in the frontier area keeps changing as before (through the birth
of new cities and relocation of existing cities), while the lowest-order
city in the middle of the two middle-order cities moves to the center
of them (lines (25) to (30) of figure 11.3 and panels (s) and (t) of figure
Evolution of a Hierarchical Urban System                              201



W(r)




 1.71           I           1           I               I




Figure 11.6
Wage curve of the fifteen-city equilibrium at N = 9.3


11.4). The simulation ends when N reaches 9.79, with the emergence
of a quite systematic hierarchical urban system a la Christaller (line
(30) of figure 11.3 and panel (t) of figure 11.4).
   Next, in figure 11.6, the solid line depicts the equilibrium (nominal)
wage curve when N = 9.30, and the broken line represents the corre-
sponding curve associated with the (forced) monocentric system under
the same population size. We can see that although all middle- and
lowest-order cities are much smaller than the central city, the presence
of these relatively small lower-order cities greatly affects the shape of
the wage curve.14In particular, middle-order cities (located at Y = 1.37
and Y = 1.92) affect greatly the local wage rates, for each satisfies a
large proportion of the local demands for M'-goods and M2-goods in
its vicinity.
   The last point above can be understood more clearly by considering
figure 11.7, which depicts the trade patterns of M-goods in the context
of fifteen-city equilibrium at N = 9.30. (In this figure, each city number
coincides with that in line (30) of figure 11.3. Hence, city 1 is the
highest-order city, cities 5 and 7 are the middle-order, and the rest are
the lowest-order.) For each industry h at each consumption location r,
the market share, MS!(u), of Mh-goods produced in city k (in terms of
delivered price at Y) can be obtained, using (4.16) and (4.30),as follows:
202                                                                                             Chapter 11




 market share
      1.1)   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .



                                                           city 5




       0 0 0 1 0 2 0 3 0 4 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 1 0 I I 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 I 7 1 8 19 2 0 2 1 2 2 2 3 2 4 2 5

                                                 (b) M'-goods

Figure 11.7
Market share curves o f the M-goods produced in each city in the 1s-city equilibrium at
N = 9.3
Evolution of a Hierarchical Urban System                               203




Setting h = 1 and 2 respectively, (11.22) yields the market share curve
of each group of goods produced in each city. (For lz = 3, by definition,
the highest-order city at Y = 0 has 100%share at every v . ) In the middle
of panel (a) in figure 11.7, for example, the bell-shaped solid-line curve
shows the market share at each Y of M’-goods produced by city 5. We
can see from panel (a) that except for the two smallest cities, 2 and 6,
every city is almost self-sufficient in its production and consumption
of M1-goods, whereas these two small cities receive most M’-goods
from their neighboring cities. More interestingly, panel (b) shows that
for M2-goods, cities 1, 5, and 7 each have a bell-shaped market share
curve covering a large number of neighboring cities. That is, not only
the highest-order city, 1, but also both middle-order cities, 5 and 7,
have the largest market shares of M2-goods in their own markets, and
they export significant amounts of M2-goods to many neighboring
cities. Therefore, the present hierarchical urban system also exhibits a
rich spatial structure in terms of M-good trade.
   Finally, figure 11.8 shows the trends of two welfare measures along
the evolutionary path, which are in strong contrast to the correspond-
ing panels, (b) and (c), in figure 10.5. Panel (a) in figure 11.8 indicates
that the equilibrium utility level of each worker is increasing almost
steadily with the economy’s population size. In panel (b), the econ-
omy’s total real land rent, defined by (10.21)’ is also increasing more
than proportionally with the population size. Thus, the economy is in
the phase of increasing returns forever. Because we have chosen a pa-
rameter set that satisfies condition (11.21), the economy maintains a
monopolar spatial structure, and the population growth of large cities
(in particular, that of the highest-order city) continues to propel the
engine of the economy’s growth through the expansion of M-good
varieties.

11.5 Conclusions

Despite the intuitive appeal of the notion that cities form a spatial hier-
archy, to our knowledge nobody has ever actually shown how such a
hierarchy can emerge from a decentralized market process. In this
chapter we have provided a demonstration in which differences among
industries in scale economies and /or transportation costs define a
                                                                 Chapter 11


  0
1.4

1.2 .

1.0 .

0.8   -




                                                             N
          1   2     3     4    5    6        7   8   9   1
                        (a) Real wage

TRLR




                  (b) Total real land rent

Figure 11.8
Trends in welfare measures along the evolutionary path


ranking of industries in terms of the tension between the pull of dis-
persed consumers and that of established agglomerations; this ranking
of industries in turn generates a hierarchy of city types, with higher-
order cities containing a wider range of industries than lower-order.
   Perhaps the surprise is how difficult this demonstration is. We have
definitely learned in the course of our urban modeling is that the sim-
ple ideas of central-place theory are not so simple to put into practice.
Nonetheless, in a qualitative sense, our theoretical model bears out the
idea that cities tend naturally to form a hierarchy both in space and in
industrial structure. In addition, this model helps to explain why we
Evolution of a Hierarchical Urban System                                   205


do not, in practice, see a "typical" size of city: why the actual city size
distribution is so wide and shows no tendency to collapse over time.
   In the next chapter we briefly detour from our theoretical structure
to describe some of the surprising and disturbing facts about the over-
all urban size distribution.

Appendix 11.1: The Equilibrium of the Agricultural Market

As noted before, in the realistic case in which r A > 0, the analysis be-
comes complex, because we must determine to which city the A-good
from each location is being shipped-the flow pattern of the A-good.
In practice, we can obtain the equilibrium flow pattern of the A-
good only through trial and error, as follows.
   Let {I,2, . . . , k, . . . ,K ] = X be the set of cities assumed to exist in
the spatial equilibrium of the economy in section 11.1,and (rl, r?, . . . ,
rk, . . . , r k ) be their location. To obtain the equilibrium flow pattern of
the A-good in this economy, the first step is to assume a regional divi-
sion of the economy, {Al, A Z I. . . , AI, . . . , A R ) ,in terms of A-good
trade. Here, each regional area, A , = [f;,f,?]     c X, is supposed to repre-
sent a minimum interval of X (E the location space of the economy)
in which the A-good trade is balanced. For convenience, region 1 is
assumed to locate at the farthest left, region 2 at the next farthest left,
                                                  fz
and so on, which implies thatf; <f: 5 fi < 5 . . .f~ < fi . Because
each regional area AI is supposed to be a minimum interval of X in
which the A-good trade is balanced, there must exist a city k ( l ) in A I ,
called the central city of region I, such that all flows of the excess A-
good (from all agricultural locations) are directed toward this city. Let
pA(s) denote the A-good price at each location s E X. Then to support
this flow pattern of the A-good in region I , the A-price curve in the
region must be such that


where p A(rk(,))represents the A-good price at the central city k ( l ) , which
is an unknown that will be determined later. That is, the A-good price
curve is single-peaked in each region. Furthermore, when two regions
are adjacent to each other, the A-price curve must be continuous at the
boundary: p A ( f ' ) = pA(fis1)iffj+ = fkl for 1 = 1, 2, . . . , R - 1.
   Because the entire surplus generated from A-good production goes
to the landlords at each location s, the land rent R ( s ) there can be ob-
tained as
206                                                                   Chapter 11


R(s) = max{pA(s)- cAw(s), 0) for s E X,                                   (llA.2)
which implies that R(f;) = 0 and R(fRt) = 0; R ( f 7 ) = 0 iffr >f,tlfor
I = 2 , 3 , . . . , R; and R ( f 7 ) = 0 if I,+ <jfi1
                                                    for I = 1,2,. . . , R - 1. That
is, if a border location is adjacent to vacant land, the land rent there
must be 0. It can also be readily verified that in equilibrium, no vacant
land remains inside any region.
   Next, in each region I , the equality of the demand and supply of the
A-good must hold. To express this condition, notice by (11.3) that the
excess supply of the A-good per unit distance at each noncity location
s equals 1 - (pAY(s)/pA(s))= 1 - p A [because Y(s) = cAW(s) + R(s)
 = pA(s) by (llA.2)]. Let X ( I ) be the set of cities in region I. Then, by
(llA.l), the demand for the A-good among workers in each city k E
X ( I ) equals pAYk/pA(rk)        = pALkwk/pA(rk).    Because all excess supply
of the A-good is transported toward the city at ~ k ( l ) ,considering the
consumption of the A-good in transportation, the equality of the de-
mand and supply of A-good at city rk(l) can be expressed as



                                                                          (llA.3)
                                              for l = l , 2, . . . , R.
In addition, for the A-good flow assumed to be feasible in each region
I , it must be confirmed that at any other city in region 1, the total supply
of the A-good to that city must not be less than the demand of the A-
good there.
     If no equilibrium solution satisfies all equilibrium conditions (noted
in section 11.1 and above), we must consider a new regional division
and/or a new set of central cities.

Appendix 11.2: The Equilibrium Conditions of the Monocentric
Economy

The central city is located at Y = 0, and to normalize prices, we set the
wage rate at the city equal to 1. Then, because for every L f > 0 for
every h, it follows that zul = zu? = 1 for every h. The agricultural price
function takes the same form as in equation (9.1),
p ~ ( r =) p A e - 7 A ~ ‘ t .                                            (11A.4)
The agricultural wage on fringe land is, as in equation (9.2),
Evolution of a Hierarchical Urban System                                             207



                                                                                 (1 1A.5)

We can now solve for p A andfexactly as we did in chapter 9. Equating
supply and demand for agricultural output gives

                                                                                 (llA.6)



   Equating real wages for manufacturing workers and the fringe ag-
ricultural worker proceeds as follows. City workers have nominal
wage 1, and the fringe agricultural worker nominal wage is given by
(11A.5). The cost-of-living index at f differs from that in the city by
factor e l ~ ~ l p h T ” - K A p A l f ,
                                    so equality of real wages means
PA   = C A e [ ~ , ~ p ” T h t ( I - ~ A ) K A=] f C A e p M I T M + ~ A U
                                                                        I        (llA.7)
where p M and         are defined in (11.9). These equilibrium conditions
are clearly exactly analogous to those of chapter 9, the only difference
being the consumption-weighted average of manufacturing trade costs
appearing in (11A.7).Given values of p Aandfimplicitly defined by (11A.6)
and (11A.7),equilibrium values of other variables can be found. In particu-
lar, by eliminating p A from equations (11A.6) and (llA.7), we have

p ” ( ~ / c A - 2 e ~ ~ I i ~=+ 2~(1~ -l f
                   -   f)
                                             f
                                         p ~ ) e-T~Sds,             (1 1A.8) I
                                                                             0

which determinesfuniquely as an increasing function of N, as in chap-
ter 9.
   Finally, to assure that no firm has an incentive to defect from the
city, all industries must meet the sustainability condition, (1129, where
the potential function for each industry h is defined by (11.10).

Appendix 11.3: The Proof that (11.16) Implies (11.17)

We prove that (11.16) implies (11.17) through several steps of analysis.

11.3.a First, we rewrite the potential function, ( l l . l O ) , in a more con-
venient form for the present purpose. Taking the negative exponential
term, exp - (oh- l)z”r, outside the brackets of ( l l . l O ) , and expressing
the potential explicitly as a function of two parameters, r andf, we
have that
208                                                                                Chapter 11




where


After the substitution of (11.11) into (llA.9), we use the following
identity,
 [2(aJl- I)rJl- r.l] r -
                       -   1 + [2(0” - 1)T’I - T A ]   i,’                   ds,
                                                             e(2(Uh-l)rl~-~A]s
                                                                                    (11A.11)

and arrange terms appropriately. Then we can eventually obtain the
new expression of the potential function as follows:
Q’l(r;f) =




22.3.b Next, in the context of section 11.2, take any industry h 5 A,
and let f be the critical fringe distance associated with the critical
population,           aJ1.
                  Then the critical potential curve, Qh(r;f”),is tangent
to the horizontal line having height 1 at the critical distance J” (refer
to figure 11.2). Hence, the pair (?I,?)  must satisfy the following two
relations,
Qy;?)
   = 1,                                                                             (11A. 13)
and
dQJyP;p)/&
        = 0,                                                                        (11A.14)
where 7” > 0 and? > 0. For convenience, let us define



                                                                                    (11A.16)

By solving (llA.13) for the term, 1 - e-“,“, we have that
Evolution of a Hierarchical Urban System                                      209




                                                                      (11A.18)
Hence, if we define



                                                                      (11A.19)



then, by (11A.17) and (llA.l8), Y"" must be such that
Q"(P')= 0,                                                            (11A .20)
and Y"' > 0. It is not difficult to show that equation (llA.20) has a unique
positive solution. (For a proof of this statement, see Fujita, Krugman,
and Mori 1995, pp. 74-76.)

22.3.c To be explicit about the parameters involved, let us rewrite
(llA.19) as follows:




where

                          1
                           h                                         (11A.22)
q h E o"AT    + (oh- l ) ~ ~ ,
                                                                     (11A .23)
and

                                                                     (11A.24)


Then, as noted above, there exists a unique positive       = F ( F ' ~ , T , ~ ,AT,
d,T ' ~ )such that
              AT, o", z h ) = 0.
Q(J"; pA, T ~ ,                                                      (11A.25)
210                                                           Chapter 11


21.3.d Next, focusing on the parameter oh[=p h / ( l - ph)], the total
derivative of (llA.25) with respect to v“” and ohleads to

                                                                (11A.26)

where



                                                                (1 1A.27)




                                                                ( 11A ,28)



in which




                                                                (11A.29)




11.3.e It is not difficult to show that aQ/a7” is always positive (see
Fujita, Krugman, and Mori 1995, p. 75). We can also show (see Fujita,
Krugman, and Mori 1995, pp. 77-78) that
AT 2 0 -+ C”(s) > 0 for s E (0, 7”).                            (11A.30)
Therefore, because the first term of the right side of (llA.28) is always
positive, it follows from (11A.28) and (11A.30) that (AT L 0 -+ aQ/aJ’l
> 0}, and hence we can conclude by (llA.26) that

                                                                (llA.31)

Next, if we substitute v“” = J (p”,z”, AT, o”,7”)into (11A.18),-fJ1,
                                                                  which
Evolution of a Hierarchical Urban System                                211



is denoted byf(pA, zA, AT, o’l, zh), can be uniquely determined. It is
not difficult to show by using (11A.31) that

                                                                   (11A.32)

If we replacefin equation (11A.8) withf” =f(p”, r”, AT, ok,t”),then
@ = f i ( p A ,zA, AT, ol’, ? I ) is uniquely determined. Then because the
relation (11A.8) determines f as an increasing function of N, we can
conclude by (llA.32) that

                                                                   (11A .33)


22.34 Next, although AT (= C k p h z ”- p A z A )contains each t”,here
we treat AT as a constant. (Notice that our objective here is not the
comparative statics of critical values, but the ordering of critical values
for different industries under a fixed set of parameters. When parame-
ters are fixed, AT becomes a fixed number.) Then, in a manner similar
to that employed in appendix 11.3.e, we can show that

                                                                   (11A.34)


                                                                   (11A.35)


                                                                   (11A.36)


22.3.g Now we fix all parameters of the model (and hence, the value
of AT) and assume that the assumption (11.15)holds and that AT 2
0. In this context, take any h 5 fi and g 5 fi, and suppose that
ph > pX (i.e., a’’> OX) and z h L 78.                              (1 1A.37)
Then, it follows that
               AT, o”,z”) < f ( p A ,zA, AT, OS, z“) by (llA.33)
Y“” = f(p”, T ~ ,
  5 F(pA,T”, AT, ox, 7s)   by (llA.34)                             (11A.38)
212                                                                            Chapter 11


We can show similarly that (llA.37) also implies that < fx and           7
< N S . In the same way, we can also show that if p” 2 pet' (i.e., 0”2 0s)
and Z ” > ZS, then 7” <     +‘,p
                            <-fx, and   < N X . Finally, it follows immedi-
ately by definition that (11A.37) implies 6’’> 6 x . Therefore, summariz-
ing the results, we can conclude that (11.16) implies (11.17).

Notes

1. For an elaboration of this empirical study (including figure 11,l),see Fujita, Krugman,
and Mori 1995.
2. The Great West is the nineteenth-century name for the area that represents the vast
interior region of the United States west of the Ohio River or Lake Michigan (Cronon
1991).
3. Figure 11.1was created by adapting figures 5 to 8 in Borchert 1967. Based on the rank
size distribution of 178 U.S. cities in 1960, Borchert defined four thresholds of population
size (at which the slope of the rank-size distribution changed noticeably). Then, for the
years before 1960, each ith size-order threshold, T,,, in year s (s = 1830 or 1870) was
defined by relationship, T,, = T,<,(N,/NJ,where T,,, is the ith threshold population in
1960, and N,[respectively, N,,]     is the U.S. population in year s [respectively, 19601. In
developing figure 11.1, for simplicity, we combined the original second- and third-order
cities; the cities of the original fourth and fifth orders were also combined to form the
new third order.
4. The threshold population for each size-order in 1830 is given as follows: The first-
order cities were those with a population beyond 530,000 (which actually did not exist),
the second-order cities had populations between 90,000 and 530,000, and the third-order
cities were those populations between 15,000 and 90,000.
5. These second-order cities, of course, also provided nearby hinterlands with most
goods and services that were provided elsewhere by third-order cities. In other words,
they upgraded themselves to second-order cities by adding functions to those of third-
order cities. The same note applies to the highest-order city. Hence, the entire system
has, roughly speaking, a hierarchical structure in which a higher-order city supplies its
own goods as well as most goods supplied in lower-order cities.
6. This story is not unique. A similar urbanization process took place in Europe in the
twelfth century as its population increased rapidly. For a comprehensive study of urban
development in Europe and the United States, see, for example, Marshal1 1989.
7. This can be shown essentially the same way as in the case of equation (9.26).
8. Condition (11.21) is evidently related to the no-black-hole condition. If H = 1, then
it is equivalent to this condition, and so ensures a monocentric structure for all N.When
H > I, the condition is clearly weaker. It does not prevent new cities from forming, but
it is sufficient for monopolarity.
9. More precisely, at this moment the monocentric system becomes structurally unstable,
implying that any small increase of N beyond N ’makes the monocentric system unstable
(in the usual sense).
10. In the previous case of chapter 10, when a single new city is born (as N reaches the
critical value), the two cities come to have the same size, which in turn makes the spatial
Evolution of a Hierarchical Urban System                                                     213


system stable. In the present context, however, if only a single (very small) city emerged
at P, for example, then the resulting two-city system would be asymmetric, which in
turn would make the system unstable. This is because the existence of any small number
of M’-firms at f ’ enhances significantly the competition of M’-industry there, even
though it does not create a significant new demand there. In this situation, for a potential
entrant into M’-industry, the opposite location, f ’ , becomes more attractive than f ’ be-
cause of the absence of (competing) M’-firms there. Hence, as N reaches fi’,the spatial
system can remain stable only when a pair of (symmetric) cities emerges at f ’ and - ? I .
11. In reality, cities rarely relocate marginally. Introducing urban infrastructure into our
model would eliminate this odd phenomenon.
12. Unlike the first frontier city, this second frontier city (on the right side of r = 0) stays
at the same location, although it emerges as a result of a continuous bifurcation. In gen-
eral, when a new frontier city emerges next to a large (highest- or medium-order) city,
it grows slowly and relocates continuously outward for a while. In contrast, if a new
frontier city emerges next to a lowest-order city (which is always small), it grows \very
rapidly and remains at the same location from the beginning.
13. Christaller’s hiernrclticnl prirzciple states that a higher-order central place shall provide
its own order of consumption goods as well as all consumption goods that are proirided
at any lower-order central places.
14. In terms of the city-index, k = 1, 2, . . . , 8, indicated in line (30) of figure 11.3, when
N = 9.30, the population of each city is as follows: N I = 6.42, N: = 0.00691, N i = 0.0722,
N4 = 0.0478, N, = 0.167, N, = 0.000763, N7 = 0.138, Ng = 0.0240.
This page intentionally left blank
12                                    An Empirical Digression:
                                      The Sizes of Cities




The empirical motivation for the analysis in chapter 11 was, of course,
the observation that real cities come in a wide variety of sizes and
types. As we saw, differences among industries in scale economies
and/or transport costs can indeed produce a hierarchical urban sys-
tem, vindicating the classic analysis of Christaller (1933).However, we
must now admit that we-along with all other urban economists
and geographers-nonetheless continue to have a problem in the
match between the theory and the data, a problem of a quite unusual
kind.
   Attempts to match economic theory with data usually face the prob-
lem that the theory is excessively neat, that theory gives simple, sharp-
edged predictions, whereas the real world throws up complicated
and messy outcomes. When it comes to the size distribution of cities,
however, the problem we face is that the data offer a stunningly neat
picture, one that is hard to reproduce in any plausible (or even implau-
sible) theoretical model.

12.1 The Size Distribution of Cities

It has been known for at least seventy years that the distribution of
larger cities in the United States is surprisingly well described by a
power law; that is, the number of cities with a population larger than
S is approximately proportional to         with a quite close to 1. (See
Carroll 1982 for a survey of the massive empirical literature on city
size distributions.) To get an idea of how well this works, consider that
in 1991 there were forty U.S. metropolitan areas with more than one
million people, twenty with more than two million, and nine with
more than four million. (Houston was just a bit too small.) Figure 12.1
plots the log of metropolitan area size against the log of rank (i.e.,
216                                                              Chapter 12




      5           6             7                   0       9             10
                                    Log of city size

Figure 12.1
U.S. city size


New York = 1, Los Angeles = 2, etc.) for the 130 such areas listed in
the Statistical Abstract of the United States; the near linearity, and the
approximately 45-degree slope, are remarkable. And more formal sta-
tistical analysis confirms this visual impression. Let N ( S ) be the num-
ber of cities of population S or greater; then a log-linear regression
finds
ln(N) = 10.549 - 1.004 ln(S)
                 (.010)
   Nor is this just a fact about a single time and place. As already sug-
gested, the distribution of city sizes in the United States has been well
described by a power law with an exponent close to 1 at least for the
past century. Dobkins and Ioannides (1996)have reassembled U.S. his-
torical data on "urban places"-that is, cities under a single jurisdic-
tion-back to 1900 into data on metropolitan areas more or less along
modern definitions, and estimated a for each census year; the estimate
for 1900 is 1.044, and in no year is it very far from 1.' International data
are more problematic, in particular because it is difficult to assemble
comparably defined metropolitan areas. However, the classic study by
Rosen and Resnick (1980) suggests that a power law with an exponent
An Empirical Digression: The Sizes of Cities                          217




-
 0)
      2.5




        1 !
                 i
                          $   -
                                     t:I
                                  1 1 i ! i
                                                .   .




                                           i+
0
                 I
      0.5 1
                                  1   .




                                      t
       0    f-   1                    I    /        ! - '   I.
            -8       -6       -4         -2         0            2
                              log city size

Figure 12.2
Evolved city size


not too far from 1 well describes most national metropolitan size distri-
butions, and that the exponent gets closer to 1 the more carefully the
metropolitan areas are defined.
   There is, in short, something suspiciously like an empirical law re-
garding the size distribution of cities. Indeed, the proposition that city
sizes follow a power law with exponent 1 is often referred to as Zipf's
Law, after eccentric author George Zipf, whose Hzrnzan Belrazubr mid the
Principle of Least €'fort (1949) collected a number of apparent empirical
regularities in the social sciences. An alternative name is the raizk-sizc
rule: If a power law with exponent 1 held exactly, the second-largest
city would have one-half the population of the largest, the third, one-
third that population, etc.

12.2 Do Urban Theories Predict the Rank-Size Rule?

The urban hierarchy model developed in chapter 11 has no automatic
tendency to produce anything resembling the rank-size rule. We can
see this by examining directly the results from our simulation exercises.
Figure 12.2, analogously to figure 12.1, plots the "data" for the fifteen-
city urban hierarchy we evolved in chapter 11. Clearly these data do
not even reproduce the log-linearity of the real data, let alone the expo-
nent of 1.It might be possible to find some parameter combination that
would produce a closer fit to the rank-size rule. However, the key fea-
ture of that rule is its apparent robustness: its consistent validity over
a century of US. data and its rough applicability across a broad cross-
section of countries as well. This means that any explanation ought to
218                                                            Chapter 12


be similarly robust, not dependent on parameters lying within some
narrow range.
   The same objection applies to attempts to explain the rank-size rule
using other models of urban size distribution. The main contender here
would be Henderson-type urban system models of the kind described
in chapter 2. Recall from that chapter that such models generate a size
distribution via the following argument: External economies tend to
be specific to particular industries, but diseconomies tend to depend
on a city’s overall size, whatever it produces. This asymmetry has two
consequences. First, because there are diseconomies to city size, it
makes no sense to put industries without mutual spillovers in the same
city-if steel production and publishing generate few mutual external
economies, steel mills and publishing houses should be in different
cities, where they do not generate congestion and high land rents for
each other. So each city should be specialized (at least in its export
industries) in one or a few industries that create external economies.
Second, the extent of these external economies may vary greatly across
industries: A textile city may have little reason to include more than
a handful of mills, whereas a banking center might do best if it contains
practically all of a nation’s financial business. So the optimal size of a
city depends on its role.
   It is an impressively concise and clean analysis. It makes the sizes
of cities an economic variable that depends on forces that can, in princi-
ple, be measured (and Henderson’s model has given rise to extensive
empirical work, such as Henderson 1988); it also helps explain why
the actual distribution of cities contains a wide size range that shows
no signs of collapsing.
   It is hard to see, however, why this model should generate anything
that looks like a power law. Suppose that the optimum banking city has
four million people, the optimum high-tech manufacturing city two
million, the optimum low-tech city one million; why should the econ-
omy require the same ratio of banking to high-tech cities as of high-
tech to low-tech? And because the Henderson model generates a size
distribution out of a tension between external economies and dis-
economies-both of which presumably depend on the technologies of
production, communication, transportation, and so on-one would
surely predict from this model that the size distribution would
change over time, rather than show the mysterious stability it exhibits
in practice.
An Empirical Digression: The Sizes of Cities                            219


   In short, the regularity of the urban size distribution poses a real
puzzle, one that neither our approach nor the most plausible alterna-
tive approach to city sizes seems to answer.

12.3 Can Random Growth Explain the Rank-Size Rule?

Both our spatial model of urban hierarchy and Henderson-type urban
system models, although they rely on some rudimentary dynamics to
limit the range of possible outcomes, are essentially tales about static
trade-offs: the trade-off between external economies and diseconomies
in the Henderson model, the trade-off between economies of scale and
distance in central-place theory as formalized in chapter 11. There is,
however, an alternative tradition, due mainly to Herbert Simon, which
views the existence of a wide size range of cities (or for that matter of
business firms) as evidence that there really are no trade-offs-that size
is more or less irrelevant. And Simon argued that precisely because size
is irrelevant, a process of random growth can produce a huge range of
sizes whose upper tail is well described by a power law.
   Simon's original exposition of a random-growth model (Simon 1955;
Ijiri and Simon 1977) has had surprisingly little impact on economic
thinking, perhaps because it is nihilistic about the economics, giving
us little more to say, but also in part because the exposition is peculiarly
dense. Here we offer a streamlined version that serves to highlight both
the insightfulness and the weakness of the model.

12.3.1   Simon's Model

As a starting point, it is useful to consider an alternative statement of
the power law on urban sizes. We know that the upper tail is well
described by a relationship of the form N = kS where N is the number
of cities with populations greater than S . We may therefore also say
that the density of city sizes is n = akS-"-?. Finally, in what turns out
to be the most useful statement, we may say that the elasticity of the
density of cities with respect to size is -a - 1:

                                                                     (12.1)

  We can now turn to Simon's urban growth model. Simon envisaged
a process in which the urban population grows over time by discrete
220                                                            Chapter 12


increments-call them “lumps,” and let the population at any point
in time, measured in lumps, be P. Where does a new lump go when
it arrives? Simon supposes that with some probability x, it goes off to
a previously unpopulated location; that is, it creates a new small city.
With probability 1 - n, it attaches itself to an existing city, with the
probability that any particular city gets the next lump proportional to
its population.
   This is an extremely nihilistic and simplistic model. It supposes that
there are neither advantages nor disadvantages to city size: A city is
simply a clump of lumps whose expected growth rate is independent
of size. If you like, you may think of a lump as an industry; in this
case, Simon’s model says that industries are equally likely to give birth
to other industries in the same city regardless of the city’s size.
   There would be little reason to take such a model seriously, except
for one thing: The size distribution of cities does follow a power law,
and Simon’s model both predicts this result and gives at least a hint
why the size distribution might have remained stable despite huge
changes in technology and economic structure.
   To analyze the model, we provisionally assume that over time the
urban size distribution converges to a steady state. That is, the ratio of
the number of cities of size S, ns, to the population tends toward a
constant. The ratio i z S / P can change for three reasons. A city of size
S - 1 may expand by one lump, which increases rzs; there are izS such
cities, and the probability of this happening for a single one of these
is (1 - n)(S - l ) / P . A city of size S may expand by one lump, with
probability (1 - x ) S / P , which reduces izs. And the overall population
is increasing, which reduces rzs/P. If we write the expected change in
n s / P when P increases and are carefully sloppy about the discrete na-
ture of the change in P, we find
Ed(r~s/P) 1                                                         (12.2)
         = - [(1 - x ) ( S - l)ns--1 - (1 - n)Szz, - n,].
  dP       P2
   If the city size distribution is to approach a steady state, how-
ever, in the long run this expected change must be 0, giving us a re-
lationship in steady state between the number of cities of sizes S
and S - 1:

tzs -
~-      (1 - x)(S - 1)                                              (12.3)
ns-1     (1 - x ) S + 1
This may be rewritten as
An Empirical Digression: The Sizes of Cities                                       221



       7-        ,      ,         I        1          I         I     I


       U?-
       m
       Y -
       K)


  c9-
x w
       5-
 c          -
 !?
h           -
Y      o
 0     c-4-
+           -
 O     '9-
 m -
-
       y-
       v-




       2-
       t-
       0


       2-1.0    1.5   2.0      2.5       3.0        3.5        4.0   4.5   5.0      5.5
                                      log of c i t y s i z e

Figure 12.3
City size from random growth


ns - ns-l =          7t - 2
                                                                                 (12.4)
      ns-1       (1 - 7t)S + 1'
   We now focus only on the upper tail of the distribution, for which
S is large. In this case, it is possible to approximate the discrete distribu-
tion of city sizes by a smooth distribution n ( S ) , with
      - ns - ns-l =
dn/dS -                 n: - 2                                                   (12.5)
  n        HS-1     (1 - n:)S + 1'
      And we can then derive the elasticity of n with respect to S,
d-n-S -
      -  n-2        -n-2
                    --                                                           (12.6)
d S n 1 - n + I l S - 1 - n'
which by (12.1) tells us that the upper tail of the city size distribution
is characterized by a power law with exponent U = 1/(1 - n).
   Does this really work? Yes, it does. Figure 12.3 shows the results of
a simulation run in which n: was set equal to 0.2, and in which we
started with 10 seeds of one lump each and allowed the population to
grow by a factor of 100. The figure shows the rank-size relationship
for the top 50 cities; it is reasonably log-linear, with a slope not too far
from the predicted value.
222                                                            Chapter 12


   If your concern is with the seeming universality of a power law on
city sizes, with an exponent that is stable across time and space, Si-
mon’s model represents a big improvement over the “economistic”
models, for at least three reasons:
1. It predicts a power law, whereas the urban system and central-place
models do not.
2. The parameter that determines the exponent on the power law is
the probability of forming a new city, which seems less obviously
something that must have changed drastically over the past century
than variables like economies of scale or urban commuting costs.
3. The mysterious exponent of 1, which seems so hard to justify, has
a natural interpretation here: It is what you get when increments to
urban population usually attach themselves to existing cities rather
than forming new cities.
   So Simon’s model seems to get us much closer to the grail of under-
standing the power law on city sizes. One might object to its lack of
economic content. However, even if one is willing to let that slide, there
is a further problem.

22.3.2 The Degeneracy Problem

In the derivation of the power law result in Simon’s model, the crucial
first step was the assumption that the urban size distribution tends to
approach a steady state. Yet this can never be exactly true: The size of
the largest city has no upper bound and therefore always tends to rise.
The model nonetheless works because the largest city tends in the long
run to have an ever smaller share of the total population, and therefore
an ever smaller share of the increment in population goes to making
that biggest city bigger. Suppose that the distribution really followed
a power law throughout (it actually does so only for the upper tail,
but this is good enough), and let S,,, be the size of the minimum possi-
ble city. Then it is straightforward to show that the share of the popula-
tion in cities larger than any given size S is (S/Sm,n)’-‘J.
                                                           Because this is
a constant, the share of the growth in population going to make the
biggest cities bigger eventually becomes negligible, justifying the
steady-state assumption.
   This works only if a > 1, which is true as long as x > 0. If II = 1,
then Simon’s process does not produce a power law-as one might
expect, because with a = 1, a power law would predict that the
An Empirical Digression: The Sizes of Cities                             223


 population of cities of size larger than any given size S would be infi-
 nite. But unfortunately, the data tell us that n is extremely close to 1,
 implying that n: is essentially 0.
     One might think that we can evade this problem by assuming that
 71: is only close to 0, but not exactly 0. However, intuition suggests
 that when 71: is very small it requires a very large increase in the urban
population to produce a smooth power law. Simulation experiments
 confirm this intuition: With n: anywhere close to 0, the distribution
 tends to approach a steady state only after a massive increase in popula-
 tion. Indeed, figure 12.3 shows the results of a simulation with n: still an
 unacceptably large 0.2; to get the fairly smooth distribution shown, the
 urban population had to increase by a factor of 100, and the fit to a
power law is still not nearly as smooth as the one we see in the actual
 data.
     It is true that U.S. urban population has increased by a factor of ap-
proximately 50 since the mid-nineteenth century. However, as we
noted earlier, a power law on U.S. city sizes-with n very close to 1-
has prevailed at least since 1890. Moreover, the rank-size rule works
fairly well for countries whose populations have grown by much less
than that of the United States.
     Incidentally, a power law with an exponent of 1 does not imply an
infinite population in the real data because we are saved from absur-
dity by an integer constraint. A continuation of the power law for the
United States would predict 0.5 cities with twice the population of New
York, 0.25 cities with four times the population, and so on, with an
implied infinite population; but because fractional cities are impossible,
this is not a real problem. This observation should send chills down
the spine of anyone who knows something about the history of physics:
The need to impose an integer constraint to avoid predicting infinite
black-body radiation led to the discovery of the quantum nature of
energy. It is deeply suggestive that the exponent of the power law on
city sizes should be precisely at the point at which the indivisible na-
ture of cities is necessary for the distribution to make sense. But what
it suggests is still a mystery.

12.3.3 Other Stochastic ModeZs

Some other kind of stochastic model might possibly explain the re-
markable tenacity of Zipf's Law. A number of analysts have suggested
that an approximate power law might emerge from Gibrat's Law: the
224                                                             Chapter 12


assumption that the expected rate of growth of a city is independent
of its size. Recently Gabaix (1997) has shown more precisely what is
required to make this work. He supposed that over some range of city
sizes both the expected growth rate of a city’s population and the vari-
ance of that growth rate are independent of size, and that the expected
growth rate is 0. This produces a steady-state distribution that approxi-
mates a power law over that range, and with an exponent of 1. A simple
example is the following: Suppose that cities can come in sizes 1, 2,4,
8, 16, 32, 64; and suppose that for all sizes except the top or bottom a
city has a one-third chance of doubling in population, a two-thirds
chance of halving, so that the expected population growth is 0. (At the
bottom, cities have some probability of staying where they are, other-
wise they double in population; at the top, the same, except that they
halve instead of doubling). It takes only a few minutes with a spread-
sheet to demonstrate that this rule does in fact produce Zipf’s Law.
   Is this a solution to the riddle? Our view is that it is ingenious but
not entirely satisfactory. It is easy, if disturbing, to suppose that there
are really constant returns to city size, so that the expected rate of
growth is independent of size. But Gibrat’s Law requires also that the
variance of that growth rate be independent of city size, which is
harder to understand: If a city consists of a simple assortment of indus-
tries, with neither positive nor negative spillovers between them,
shouldn’t the variance of the growth rate decline with size simply as
a matter of diversification? The economics of the phenomenon remain
puzzling.
   Krugman 1997 makes yet another suggestion: The randomness that
creates the power law may not involve random growth but random
”connections” in space. For example, imagine port cities that serve the
interior along a transport network formed by random connections
among transport nodes, with the direction of the preferred connections
reflecting accidents either of history or of geography. Alternatively, we
could suppose that the connections lie in some abstract space of indus-
try linkages. In either case, the size distribution of the hinterlands
would then reflect the principles of ”percolation theory,” a well-
studied area in the physical sciences. (The original motivating example
was the size distribution of connected areas in porous rocks.) Perco-
lation models easily produce power laws; indeed, the distribution of
river sizes, as measured by volume of flow, fits Zipf’s Law quite well!
A percolation model might provide a way around the problems with
Simon’s model. However, all this is purely speculative.
An Empirical Digression: The Sizes of Cities                                          225


12.4    Conclusions

At this point we have no resolution to the explanation of the striking
regularity in city size distributions. We must acknowledge that it poses
a real intellectual challenge to our understanding of cities, in at least
two ways. The first is that at this point nobody has come up with a
plausible story about the process that generates the rank-size rule, al-
though Simon’s early analysis and later variants do provide some in-
sight into the kind of process that might be involved.
   But there is also a more profound issue: The stochastic models that
have been proposed all rely fundamentally on the assumption of con-
stant returns to city size, so that a city’s expected growth rate is inde-
pendent of its size. Yet all existing economic models of cities involve
returns that are anything but constant. Rather, they involve a tug-of-
war between increasing returns and decreasing returns, which for any
given type of city (industry specialization in Henderson-type models,
order in the central-place model of chapter 11) determines a character-
istic size. Perhaps there is some way that we do not currently under-
stand to reconcile the tension between centripetal and centrifugal
forces that we believe determines city sizes at the micro level, and the
as-if-constant-returns dynamics that seem to apply at the macro level.
We hope that future research will resolve this puzzle.

Note

1. Dobkins and Ioannides actually estimate a for all cities; most other estimates use only
the upper tail. For example, their estimate for 1990 covers 334 metropolitan areas, not
the 130 in our own regression. Both practical experience and the theoretical analysis
below suggest that their already striking results would be even more striking had they
restricted themselves to the larger areas.
This page intentionally left blank
13                                    Ports, Transportation
                                      Hubs, and City Location




In a way, we have allowed von Thiinen’s agenda to dictate our discus-
sion of cities up to this point: We tried to explain the emergence of
spatial structure on a one-dimensional version of his “fertile plain
which is crossed by no navigable river or canal.” Yet in reality any
schoolchild can tell you that many cities owe their origin precisely to
their position on rivers, canals, good harbors, and so on. Indeed, most
of the world’s great cities are located at transportation hubs of one sort
or another.
   In chapter 8 we suggested that a way to introduce the effect of such
hubs without sacrificing the simplicity of the linear economy is to imag-
ine that the economy branches at some point, forming something like
the letter Y-or, more generally, something like an asterisk (*). In this
chapter we apply the same model developed in chapters 9 and 10 to
such a branching geometry and show why and in what sense the point
of branching-the crotch of the Y-is an especially likely place for a
city to emerge.
   Figure 13.1 illustrates the geometry of our modified world. As before,
there is one-dimensional land of uniform quality stretching indefinitely
along a line, but this line splits into two indistinguishable branches at
the brunch point, labeled b. Although the easiest interpretation of the
figure may be as one in which three branches of a valley converge at
some point, we view it as a metaphorical representation for any sort of
transportation hub, whether created by the crossing of transportation
routes or even by the availability of a port through which goods may
be shipped to and from distant regions.’
   It is immediately apparent that the branch point has a sort of special
claim to be an urban location. As one moves away from b down any
of the branches, one gets closer to consumers along that branch, but
one moves away from consumers along two (or more, if the economy
228                                                               Chapter 13




Figure 13.1
The new location space (k = 1)


is an asterisk) branches. Thus other things being the same, one would
expect b to be a point of especially good market access.
   To be more precise, we will show that when the agricultural area of
the economy extends into all three branches of land, the market potential
curve for manufacturing has a cusp at the branch point, even when there
is no city there. As a result, the branch point is likely to be a local maxi-
mum for the market potential curve, and therefore likely to be a place at
which a new city emerges when population grows large enough.
   We use the word ”likely” advisedly. A city need not develop at b.
If the branch point lies in the agglomeration shadow of a preexisting
city, the process of city formation may bypass it. (A possible real-world
example: South Korea’s largest city, Seoul, is not a port. Although the
seaport at Inchon, about 100 kilometers from Seoul, is Seoul’s gateway
to the rest of the world, Seoul’s lock-in effect has been so strong that
Inchon has never become a full-fledged city). But whereas most points
along the line develop only under very specific combinations of param-
eters and initial conditions-normally, for a set of measure 0 in the
relevant space-there is always a range of parameters and initial condi-
tions under which a city develops at the branch point. Thus emergence
of a city there is in this sense ”likely.”

13.1 The Monocentric Economy

We begin with a hypothetical economy with a small population, and
with a single existing urban center that happens not to be at the branch
point. It will turn out to be helpful to take whatever branch of the Y
(or asterisk) that the preexisting city is on, together with one other
branch (it does not matter which) and call the two combined the bnseliize
of the economy, the line along which we will calculate market poten-
Ports, Transportation Hubs, and City Location                            229



tial. We define the location of this initial city as the origin of that line.
In figure 13.1, the existing city’s location is indicated by 0.
   We have drawn figure 13.1for an economy with three branches, that
is, with one branch in addition to the baseline. At no real cost we can,
however, just as well imagine an asterisk-shaped economy in which
there are k branches in addition to the baseline. When k = 0, we have
the linear location space of chapter 9. When k = 1, we have the Y-
shaped location space of figure 13.1. We will use the city at 0 as the
origin for measuring location on all branches; thus for all branches
other than the one on which the city sits (and for that branch as well
between the city and the junction point), the location coordinate is also
the distance to the city.
   Except for the introduction of a branching location space, this mono-
centric world is identical to that discussed in chapter 9. Thus we need
not spend much time describing it; we need only think through the
small differences.
   When the population is sufficiently small, agriculture takes place
only near the existing city, and the model is indistinguishable from
that of chapter 9. As population continues to increase, however, the
agricultural frontier moves away from the city. Because the attrac-
tiveness of farming land depends only on how far it is from the city,
not on which direction, agriculture spreads up all branches; in particu-
lar, once the frontier distancefexceeds the distance to the branch point
b, agriculture extends a distancef - b up each nonbaseline branch. For
convenience, let us introduce a new variable, 6, such that
      0 f o r f s b,
                                                                       (13.1)
6 = { 1 f o r f > b.
The cultivated area on the baseline is always equal to 2f; that in the
nonbaseline branches is 6 k ( f - b); thus, the total cultivated area is 2f +
6 k ( f - b). Except for this change, we have the same equilibrium condi-
tions for the monocentric economy as in chapter 9. It is straightforward
to show that, as in chapter 9,fis an increasing function of N, going to
infinity as N does; and as before, everything in the monocentric econ-
omy can be expressed as a function off.
   It is when we turn to the implied market potential function that the
branching makes a difference. As before, we define the market poten-
tial as a transform of the ratio of the wage that zero-profit manufactur-
ing could pay to the wage rate in agriculture:
230                                                            Chapter 13




                                                                    (13.2)




                                                                    (13.3)




where d(r,s) is the distance to farmers off the baseline, determined by

                                                                    (13.4)

   The crucial difference from chapter 9 (equation 9.14) is the third term
in (13.3), which represents the impact on the zero-profit wage rate of
access to the market provided by the off-baseline farmers. The impor-
tant point to notice is that as one approaches the junction point from
the city, the distance to farmers off the baseline is steadily decreasing;
but as soon as one passes the junction, it is increasing. This, of course,
is what creates the cusp in market potential.
   To fill in the market potential, recall the expressions for the price
index and agricultural prices in the monocentric equilibrium (equa-
tions (9.4) and (9.1), respectively). Substituting them in the wage equa-
tion and rearranging terms, we get




                                  +
Let us define

                                                                    (13.6)

which represents the supply of agricultural goods to the city. Then
since agricultural market clearing implies, analogously to equation
Ports, Transportation Hubs, and City Location                         231



(9.5), that p p A / L M = (1 - p)/A(j-)/ we can rewrite (13.5) as follows:



                                                                   (13.7)



Hence, substituting this into (13.2), the market potential at each loca-
tion is given by




                                                                   (13.8)




A monocentric geography can be sustained only if this potential curve
nowhere exceeds 1.

13.2 The Impact of a Transportation Hub on the Market Potential
Function

It turns out to be helpful to divide the market potential function into
two pieces, that to the left and that to the right of the junction point:

Q(r) =
         i
         Q(Y)    for Y 5 b,
         Q,(Y) for Y 2 b.
                                                                   (13.9)

Then if we calculate each integral in (13.8) along the same lines as in
the derivation of function (9.24), we find that for 0 5 Y 5 b,2



                                                                  (13.10)



and for Y 2 b,
232                                                                         Chapter 13




                                                                               (13.12)




Here $(f)is the proportion of the city's agricultural supply that comes
from nonbaseline branches.
  Whenf < b, we have 6 = 0 and hence $(f) = 0; thus, the potential
function above becomes identical to (9.24), as expected. Whenf > b,
$(f)increases asf increases, and hence the potential function becomes
increasingly different from that in chapter 9.
  Figure 13.2, which has been constructed under the same set of basic
parameters used for the construction of fig. 9.4, with additional geo-
graphical parameters k = 2 and b = 0.5 (implying that two "valleys"


  W)
1 . 2 , .    .    . .       I
                            I
                                .    .    . .         .   ,    .
l.f   -                     1
                            I




0.6 .
0.5   -
0.4 -                      I


0.3                ,   ; b . ,     ,   *   ,              .   ,
                                                                        r
  0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1 . 1           1.2 1.3

Figure 13.2
Potential curves under the influence of hub effects
Ports, Transportation Hubs, and City Location                         233


branch off from the baseline at a distance 0.5 from the city), illustrates
the shape of potential curves when f > b. In contrast to what we saw
in figure 9.4, the potential curves now have sharp cusps at b. We can
evaluate this cuspiness by differentiating R,( v ) and Q,(r) respectively
at r = b, to find that


Thus the derivative of the potential curve has a discontinuity at the
branch point. Because @(f) increases with f, this effect becomes
stronger as the agricultural area expands farther beyond b. Notice also
that @(f) increases when k increases. Hence, the more branches, the
stronger the attraction of the branch point.
   Recall from figure 9.4 that in the monocentric economy of chapter
9, as f increases, the potential curve shifts upward everywhere except
at Y = 0. In the present context, the situation is a bit more complex.
Locations less than 2b to the right of the city always become more at-
tractive as f increases. However, locations at a distance greater than
that have worse access to the off-baseline branches than the original
city, so they can actually lose market potential as the population of
those branches grows.3 Except for this technical detail, however, the
effect of growing N on the market potential curve is as in chapter 9:
we can think of the curve as humping itself upward as the population
grows, as illustrated in figure 13.2.
   And figure 13.2 immediately gives us the punchline: Because of the
cuspiness of the potential curve, it is indeed likely that when the popu-
lation reaches the critical level at which a new city emerges, that new
city emerges precisely at the branch point b-Likely, but not certain.
Let us conclude this chapter by summarizing the possible patterns of
spatial evolution in this model.

13.3 Patterns of Spatial Evolution

To think about the economy's possible spatial development, let us hold
the parameters of the economy constant and imagine varying just one
thing: the location of the branch point, b. The economy's spatial evolu-
tion then follows one of the three basic patterns indicated in figure
13.3.4
   First, suppose that b is much smaller than F, where F is the critical
distance from the nonbranching model of chapter 9 (illustrated in
figure 9.4). Then as the population increases gradually, we see pattern
234                                                              Chapter 13




        Pattern 1                         Pattern 2            Putlern 3
        no city                       the first new city     possible city at b
          at b                                at b           after new cities
                                                             elseswhere
Figure 13.3
Possible patterns of spatial etvolution


1: The junction never develops a city. Instead, the first new city (or
cities) emerges somewhere beyond b. The junction never develops as
a city because it is too close to the existing city, and hence it remains
in the agglomeration shadow of that city. Panel (a) in figure 13.4 depicts
the critical potential curve assocated with pattern 1, which has just
reached 1 at distance r1 from the existing city. At this point, because
the market potential becomes 1 at k + 1 new locations simultaneously,
as many as k + 1 new cities will emerge through a catastrophic bifurca-
tion. Although it is difficult to determine precisely how many new
cities will emerge at this moment, eventually every branch of land will
have many cities as N continues to increase. The original city at 0 will,
however, have a continued advantage from its proximity to the junc-
tion: Even though it is actually not right at b, it has managed to pre-
clude the emergence of a competitor there, and thus grows as the
dominant city by using that junction as the gateway to other branches.
   Second, if b is neither too large nor too small we get pattern 2-the
case illustrated in panel (b) of figure 13.4-in which the next city does
emerge at the branch point. In this two-city economy, the new city at the
branch point is always larger than the original city at 0. The original city
may disappear completely when the new city emerges. In effect, the econ-
omy remains monocentric, but finally manages to break the forces that
locked its city in the wrong location.'
   Finally, suppose that the branch point is very far away from the ex-
isting city, giving rise to pattern 3. Then as the critical potential curve
depicted in panel (c) of figure 13.4 indicates, the first new city will
emerge at a location to the left of the branch point. Thereafter, this new
city plays the role of the original city at 0, and the basic analysis is
repeated.
   The important point to make, as suggested before, is that whereas
an ordinary point along the baseline will be the site of a new city only
Ports, Transportation Hubs, and City Location                           235




                                           b
sZ=1                                                                r




                                 (b) Pattern2



                                                 r3     b
LR=l
                                                        I
                                                                    r




                                 (c) Pattern 3

Figure 13.4
Critical potential curve associated with each pattern


under very specific conditions-indeed, only if the original city is at
exactly the right point-there is always a range of conditions under
which the branch point becomes a city. In effect, the cuspiness intro-
duced by the branch gives someone trying to make the economy build
a city there wiggle room in all directions; and in that sense the branch
point is indeed a likely, though not certain, point for a city to develop.

13.4 Conclusions

When one of the authors mentioned to a noneconomist friend that we
had managed to show why ports and other transportation hubs be-
come sites for cities, his reaction was disbelief: ”Didn’t we already
know that?” Well, we did-but it had never been formalized. We have
236                                                                            Chapter 13


seen in this chapter how the same analytical framework we have used
to model the emergence of cities in a featureless landscape can be used
to step away from those assumptions and examine how transportation
hubs change that spatial evolution.
   The important point to make here is that as we see it, the main func-
tion of a hub in city location is catalytic. The hub provides some contin-
uing advantages to a city, but the main thing it does is provide the
city’s site with an advantage over other sites during that critical period
when the economy’s growth has made the emergence of a new city
necessary. And our theory thus neatly deals with a paradox about the
world’s great cities: Nearly all are major ports (or were at one time),
but many have long since ceased to be mainly port cities. Our model,
in other words, finds nothing paradoxical in the fact that the Erie Canal
made New York-and is now no more than a tourist attraction.

Notes

1. That is, figure 13.1 may be interpreted as saying that the ”old world” represented by
the horizontal line is connected with the “new world” (shown by the diagonal half-line)
through ports at zero transport costs. See Fujita and Mori 1996 for a study of the hub
effect of ports in a more realistic situation with positive transport costs between ports.
2. Whenf 5 b, $(f)= 0, and hence Q ( - r ) = Q ( r ) for all r; that is, $2 is symmetric with
respect to r = 0. Whenf > b, Q ( - r ) < Q ( r ) for all Y > 0. Therefore, when we study the
formation of new cities (which occurs at locations where Q ( r ) = l), it is sufficient to
focus on r 2 0.
3. Recall that the market potential is normalized such that Q(0) E 1. Hence, the market
potential at any location is always relative to the city location.
4. The following discussion is based on the results of simulations under the tech-
nological / taste parameters given in footnote 7 in chapter 9.
S. Numerical simulations under the set of parameters given for figure 9.4 show that if
k 2 2, then the original city always disappears whenever the new city emerges at b.
IV   International Trade
This page intentionally left blank
14                                    International Specialization




More than sixty years ago, Bertil Ohlin concluded his seminal book
on international trade theory-entitled, by the way, Znterregioizal aitd
Interizatioizal Trade-with the declaration that international trade theory
is simply international location theory. Yet in practice, over the past
170 years, the two subfields have barely communicated with each
other. One of our objectives is to help remedy that breach; in this part
of the book we show how the same basic approach we have applied
to the study of regions and cities can yield important insights into the
processes that drive specialization and trade among nations.
   But what, in economic terms, is a nation? As we move across geo-
graphical space, what is special about crossing a national boundary? A
national boundary is, of course, a point at which political jurisdictions
change. But we have not put government into our models and will not
introduce it here.
   One might well argue that in practice national boundaries are associ-
ated with de facto barriers to the flow of goods-not only explicit barri-
ers like tariffs and import quotas, but also implicit obstacles imposed
by language differences, inconsistent standards, and the sheer nuisance
associated with border crossing. Evidence from Canadian-U.S. trade
suggests that even that most innocuous of borders has a huge impact
(McCallum 1995; Helliwelll997): On average, the exports of Canadian
provinces to other Canadian provinces are some twenty times larger
than their exports to equivalently situated U.S. states, and evidence
from urban price movements suggests that the border imposes barriers
to arbitrage comparable to 1,700 miles of physical space (Engel and
Rogers 1996).
  Althoush such limits to trade are a crucially important consequence
of borders in practice, they do not introduce qualitatively new issues
240                                                          Chapter 14


from those we discussed in parts I1 and I11 of this book, and we will
not try to model the effects of borders on the "geometry" over which
flows of goods take place.
   Instead we will focus on a different kind of barrier that national
boundaries normally present: a barrier to the movement of people.
Whereas advanced countries nowadays generally have quite low for-
mal barriers to trade in goods, they universally impose strict restric-
tions on immigration, and evidence suggests that even where the
immigration regime is relatively open and there are no language barri-
ers, international migration is far smaller than migration within coun-
tries. Helliwell (1997, p. 20) writes, "For every resident in a Canadian
province who was born in a U.S. state, how many will you meet who
were born in some other Canadian province (other than Quebec) of
similar size, distance, and personal income per capita? The current an-
swer appears to be close to 100." And as a result, differences in wage
rates and per capita income are far larger between than within coun-
tries: Although the European Union is similar to the United States in
population and far more compact geographically, it has twice as much
regional dispersion in per capita income.
   In short, national boundaries are associated with barriers to labor
mobility, and we take this as the defining characteristic of "nations."
That is, in this and succeeding chapters we move from the assumption
that labor moves over time to equalize real wages in all locations to
the other extreme, and assume that labor is immobile between distinct
national units.
   Without labor mobility, of course, one cannot have agglomeration
in the usual sense; nor does the cumulative process of geographical
concentration we have described in earlier chapters operate in the same
way. However, a process of international specialization whose logic is
very similar to that of classic agglomeration can emerge through the
joint role of manufacturing as a producer and consumer of intermedi-
ate goods. A region with a relatively large manufacturing sector typi-
cally offers a greater variety of intermediates, implying lower costs of
production for final goods, that is, forward linkages. Conversely, a
large final goods sector in manufacturing provides a large local market
for intermediates, that is, backward linkages. The result of these link-
ages cannot be concentration of population in particular countries, but
it can lead to a process of specialization that concentrates manufactur-
ing or particular industries in a limited number of countries.
International Specialization                                            241


  In this chapter we develop a two-country model in which intermedi-
ate goods play a role closely parallel to that played by labor mobility
in the two-region model developed in chapter 5. Having set out the
model in section 14.1, we turn in section 14.2 to an investigation of the
patterns of industrial specialization that the model generates. In section
14.3 we show that the model yields some highly suggestive insights
into the effect of global economic integration on real incomes; in section
14.4 we slightly generalize the mode1,in a way that, we believe, sug-
gests a broader interpretation of the relationship between trade costs
and national inequalities.

14.1 A Model with Intermediate Goods

When economists discuss intermediate goods, they normally think of
many industrial sectors linked through an input-output matrix. Some
sectors are relatively upstream, producing intermediate goods, and
others downstream, with most of their production going for final con-
sumption. Although the input-output structure of production can be
important (and will be discussed in later chapters), it also adds compli-
cations that we might want to avoid if possible. Luckily, as long as
we are in a Dixit-Stiglitz world in which manufacturing miraculously
manages to be a single sector of many goods, we can use a clever trick
to introduce input-output linkages without actually introducing any
additional industries. We simply assume that manufacturing uses itself
(in addition to labor) as an input, that is, that the same aggregate of
manufacturing varieties demanded by consumers is also an input into
the production of each variety. Thus the same industry is both down-
stream, producing output for final consumption, and upstream.
   To see how this works, consider the technology of each manufactur-
ing firm. Until now we have assumed that production uses a single
input: labor, at location r price w,. We now modify the manufacturing
production function so that the input becomes a composite of labor
and intermediate goods. Rather than stating the production function
explicitly, we can define it indirectly in terms of the relevant price indi-
ces.' Let the price of the intermediate goods in location Y be G,; we then
assume that the input composite is a Cobb-Douglas function of labor
and intermediates with intermediate share a, so that the price of the
input is 7u;-*GP.This input is used in both the fixed cost of production
and the marginal cost and, as before, we choose units such that the
242                                                              Chapter 14


marginal input requirement equals the price-cost markup (c = p) to
ensure that firms set price according to
                                                                      (14.1)
  The intermediate, in turn, is assumed to be a CES function of the
varieties available;2 thus the price index for that intermediate, G, at
location Y, takes the form

                                                                      (14.2)

where 1 2 ~is the numbers of varieties produced in location s, p s the f.o.b.
price, and T,, the transport cost. This is exactly as in chapter 4 (equation
4.15) and implies that the same price index is the appropriate one both
in consumer preferences and in firms' techn~logies.~        In other words,
the assumed elasticity of substitution among varieties of manufacture
is the same for firms as it is for consumers. This simplifying assumption
is not central to our results but does a great deal to keep analysis
manageable."
   An implication of this technology is that firms use all varieties of
manufactured products as intermediate goods in production and gain
from having a wider range of varieties produced in the world. This
creates a forward linkage: Access to a greater variety of intermediate
products reduces the price index and hence the costs of production of
firms that use those intermediates. Furthermore, the more varieties are
available locally, the lower are costs, as there is a saving on intermedi-
ates' transport costs.
   Turning to sales, part of each firm's output now goes to consumers
as final consumption and part to firms for intermediate usage. Demand
for manufactures in each location thus comes from both sources. We
define location r f s expenditure on manufactures, E,, as
E , = PY,+ a i i , p , q * .                                          (14.3)
The first term on the right-hand side of this equation is demand from
consumers; as before, p is the share of manufactures in consumption
and Y is income. The second is intermediate demand. Assuming that
firms are at zero-profit equilibrium with sales q*, the total costs of loca-
tion Y firms equal the total value of their production, rz,p,q*. A share a
of these costs consists of the purchase of intermediates, and this is the
source of the backward linkage among firms. The more firms that pro-
International Specialization                                           243



duce at location r, the larger the intermediate demand, and thus, other
things equal, the larger the total expenditure on manufactures.
  We now imagine a world of two countries and set the total labor
supply in each country equal to 1.Within each country, we assume that
labor is intersectorally mobile between manufacturing and agriculture.
The share of country Y'S labor force in manufacturing we denote h,.
The total value of manufacturing output in country r is nryrq*, so the
manufacturing wage bill in country r is a share (1 - a) of this,
wrhr= (1 - a)1zrpr9*.                                                (14.4)
We choose units such that q* = 1/(1 - a),so that

n     7u
                                                                     (14.5)
      Pr

As in previous chapters, we want to direct attention to the allocation
of labor among sectors, h (rather than the number of firms), and to
wages (rather than to prices). Using (14.5) and (14.1) in the price index
(14.2), we can write the price indices for each country as
                                                                     (14.6)


These expressions are similar to the analogous expressions in earlier
chapters (e.g., equations (5.9) and (5.10)), but now the price indices
depend not just on wages in each location but also on price indices,
for these enter marginal cost and hence the prices firms charge.
  Firms make zero profits when the price they charge is such that they
sell 1/ (1 - a) units of their output. As before, this defines the manufac-
turing wage that is consistent with zero profits. These wage equations
now take the form




                                                                    (14.9)

Like the price equations, these resemble the analogous equations we
have seen earlier (e.g., 5.11 and 5.12) but also contain some differences.
First, expenditures on manufacturing in each location are now given
by the terms El and E 2 (instead of pY, and pY2).Second, our choice of
244                                                         Chapter 14


firm scale, 1/ (1 - a),accounts for the term in the denominator of the
left-hand side. Finally, the numerator of the left-hand side gives the
price that must be charged if firms are to make zero profits, which now
depends on both the wage rate and the price index in each location.
   We have already seen that expenditure comes both from consumers
(share p of income) and from firms demanding intermediates (share a
of output), and using (14.4) in (14.3) we derive

                                                                (14.10)

  Both manufacturing and agriculture generate income. Agricultural
output we take as freely tradeable and use as numeraire, but we allow
for a more general agricultural production function than we have used
up to now. Agricultural output depends on the amount of labor em-
ployed in the sector, 1 - h, according to the increasing and concave
production function A ( l - A,).Income in each country is therefore


The agricultural wage is the marginal product of labor, A'(1 - h,),and
the wage gap between sectors we define as U,,


   Given the shares of each country's labor force in manufacturing, h,,
h2,equations (14.6)-( 14.12) characterize the short-run equilibrium and
give the wage levels and the wage gap between agriculture and indus-
try in each country. We assume a simple adjustment dynamic in which,
within each country, labor moves from agriculture to industry if U, is
positive, and vice versa. The long-run equilibrium occurs either when
U, is 0 in both countries, or at a corner point, when one sector has
contracted to 0 in one country. Long-run equilibrium manufacturing
wages therefore satisfy


ZU, 2 A'(1 - h,),    h, = 1,                                    (14.13)


In words, when both sectors operate, wages are equalized; an economy
that has only manufacturing may have manufacturing wages greater
than the agricultural marginal product; if there is no manufactur-
International Specialization                                          245


ing, then the manufacturing wage must be less than or equal to the
agricultural wage.


14.2 The Structure of Equilibria

To understand the locational forces at work in this model, consider
 the effects of increasing the amount of labor operating in country 1
manufacturing, h,. Does this raise the wage gap, zu, - A’(l - hl)-in
which case it encourages further increases in hl-or decrease it? Four
forces are at work. The first is the response of the marginal product of
labor in agriculture; if the agricultural production function is strictly
concave, a decline in agricultural employment raises the marginal
product, and this reduces the incentive for a further movement of labor
into manufacturing. The second force is product market competition.
An increase in h, is associated with the supply of more varieties and
this, as usual, reduces the price index G1. This shifts the demand curve
for each firm’s output downward and reduces the manufacturing
wage. (This effect occurs via the price index terms on the right-hand
side of the wage equation (14.8).)
   Both the agricultural wage response and product market competi-
tion effects are stabilizing forces, working against agglomeration.
Working in the opposite direction are forward and backward linkages.
The forward linkage arises as the reduction in G1 associated with an
increase in hl reduces the cost of intermediates, tending to increase the
instantaneous equilibrium wage. (This effect shows up via the G, term
on the left-hand side of the wage equations.) The demand or backward
linkage arises as a higher value of hl raises expenditure on manufac-
tures in country 1 ( E , in equation (14.10)), shifting firms’ demand
curves up and tending to raise the manufacturing wage (equation
(14.8)).
   The tension among these forces is the subject of this chapter, but we
start with a simplification. We initially switch off the agricultural wage
effect by making two assumptions. The first is that the agricultural pro-
duction function is linear in output: A ( l - h,) = (1 - A,). This implies
that the agricultural wage is unity, and hence that-as long as there
is some agricultural employment in the economy-the equilibrium
manufacturing wage is also unity. The second assumption is that the
share of manufactures in consumption, p, is not more than 1 /2. This
says that the level of demand for manufactures is small enough for all
246                                                             Chapter 14



 A2




0.8



0.6



0.4



0.2



0.0
      0.0    0.2       0.4       0.6        0.8

Figure 14.1
Manufacturing employment and wages, T = 3


of manufacturing to fit in one country, and thus ensures that, even if
all manufacturing is concentrated in a single country, this country also
has some agriculture. The two assumptions together ensure that equi-
librium wages in both countries are equal to unity. Manufacturing can
therefore draw labor from agriculture at a constant wage, neutralizing
any factor market competition effects.
   To understand the structure of equilibria we commence with simula-
tion analysis, the results of which are illustrated in figures 14.1-14.3.
The axes are the shares of each country’s labor force in manufacturing,
hl and h2.The curve zul = 1 gives combinations of h , and h2 at which
the manufacturing wage in country 1 equals unity, the agricultural
wage. To the right of this curve the wage is less than unity; to the left
it is more. Our assumption that manufacturing employment falls or
rises according to intersectoral wage differences means that the hori-
zontal arrows on the figure indicate the evolution of h,. The curve
zu2 = 1 gives analogous information for country 2, and vertical arrows
show the corresponding dynamics.
   The three figures are drawn for high, low, and intermediate levels
of trade costs, respectively, giving the following structure of equilibria.
International Specialization                                         247



 A2




 0.8



 0.6                           1
 0.4



0.2



0.0
       0.0   0.2       0.4       0.6          OS

Figure 14.2
Manufacturing employment and wages, T = 1.5


At high trade costs (figure 14.1), the w 1= 1 curve is relatively steep,
and w2 = 1 relatively flat. (The intuitive reason for this can be seen by
thinking about autarky, in which case w1 = 1 is vertical, and ru2 = 1
horizontal.) Consequently, there is a unique and stable equilibrium at
h, = h, = p. Manufacturing is equally divided by locations, and the
two economies are symmetric.
   At lower trade costs, the w 1 = 1 curve becomes flatter, and 1u2 = 1
steeper. Figure 14.2 shows a case in which the direction in which the
curves intersect is reversed, and there are three equilibria. The symmet-
ric equilibrium is now unstable, whereas full concentration of industry
in either country 1 or country 2 is a stable equilibrium.
   At intermediate trade costs, the pattern is as given in figure 14.3,
with five equilibria. The symmetric equilibrium is stable, as is concen-
tration of manufacturing in either country 1 or country 2. Between
these stable equilibria there are unstable equilibria.
   This should sound familiar from chapter 5: Just as we did there, we
find that for sufficiently low trade costs, geographical concentration
of manufacturing becomes possible; at somewhat lower trade costs, it
becomes inevitable. Thus our analytical tasks are to find the sustain
248                                                           Chapter 14




0.8



0.6
                               1
0.4



0.2



0.0
      0.0    0.2      0.4        0.6       0.8

Figure 14.3
Manufacturing employment and wages, T = 2.15


point, at which the concentrated equilibria of figures 14.2 and 14.3exist,
and the break point, at which the symmetric equilibrium becomes
unstable.
   To find the sustain point, we start by assuming that manufacturing
is concentrated in country 1, so hZ = 0. Wages in both countries are
unity, because of our assumption that constant returns to scale agricul-
ture is operating in both countries, so income in both countries is also
unity. This means that h, = 2p, that is, the manufacturing wage bill h1
equals the value of manufactures supplied to consumers in the two
countries, 2p. The price indices ((14.6) and (14.7)) therefore take values


Because income in both countries is 1, the manufacturing expenditure
levels (14.10) reduce to

                                                                  (14.15)

Substituting these in the country 2 wage equation (14.9) gives country
2 manufacturing wage:
International Specialization                                             249




                                                                     (14.16)

Concentration of manufacturing in country 1 is an equilibrium provid-
ing that this is less than or equal to the agricultural wage, unity, so
that there is no movement of country 2 workers to manufacturing.
   It is striking that this expression for the sustain condition is identical
to that in chapter 5, except that the share of the mobile factor in the
economy (p in chapter 5) is now replaced by the share of intermediates
in production, a. The term T-* captures the forward linkages foregone
if a firm establishes in country 2-it bears transport costs T on its in-
termediates, which account for share a of costs. The term in square
brackets is the backward linkage. Country 1 has share (1 + a ) / 2 of
world expenditure on manufactures, and this is weighted by T’-“;
this weighting captures the transport cost disadvantage that a firm in
country 2 would have in supplying country 1. Country 2 has share
(1 - a ) / 2 of manufacturing expenditure, and the term is weighted
by Tap’, representing the disadvantage that firms in country 1 face in
supplying the country 2 market.
   We do not need to spend time studying the shape of the relationship
given in (14.16), because it is exactly as described in chapter 5 and
figure 5.5. Providing that (0- l ) / o = p > a, there is a unique sustain
value of T > 1, below which agglomeration of manufacturing in a sin-
gle country is sustainable. The inequality p > a is of course a re-
statement of the no-black-hole condition.
   We now turn to the point at which symmetry is broken. At the sym-
metric equilibrium, manufacturing wages in each country equal the
marginal product of labor in agriculture (equation (14.13)), and the
equilibrium is stable if increasing manufacturing employment drives
manufacturing wages below agricultural, and unstable otherwise. We
must therefore evaluate the following derivatives:

                                                                     (14.17)

Because we assume in this section that agriculture has constant returns
to scale in its single input, labor, the term A” is equal to 0. To evaluate
dzu,/dh,, we have to totally differentiate the equilibrium defined by
equations (14.6)-(14.11). As we have seen in earlier chapters, the fact
that the calculation is around the symmetric equilibrium greatly sim-
plifies this. First, we can easily calculate the symmetric equilibrium
250                                                            Chapter 14


values of endogenous variables; they are
h = p,           Y = 1,     zu = 1,
                                                                     (14.18)
GI - a ( l a ) = cl[l + T1-a],   E = p / ( l - a),
where the absence of subscripts denotes symmetric equilibrium values.
Second, we can look at a symmetric perturbation of the equilibrium,
dh = dh, = -dh2, which causes equal and opposite changes in the
values of variables at each location, so we can work with dG E dG, =
-iiG2, d E = d E , = -dE2, and so on.
   Totally differentiating the price indices, (14.6) or (14.7), gives
                                      dG
[(l - CJ)G'-' + pao(l - T' ' ) G P a o ]
                                      __ =
                                         G
                                                                     (14.19)
       G u'(l - P a ) d h+ pG au(l - T'-")[l - o(a - l ) ] d z ~ .
As in earlier chapters, it is convenient to define a parameter Z ,

                                                                     (14.20)

and using this, equation (14.19) becomes

[l - 0 + aaZ]__   Z
             dG = -dh         + [l - o(l - a)]Zdzu.                  (14.21)
             G    P
Differentiating the wage equations, (14.8) or (14.9),with similar substi-
tutions, yields

                                                                     (14.22)

Turning to expenditure on manufactures, we substitute the definition
of income (14.11) into the equation for expenditure (14.10), giving



                                                                     (14.23)



and differentiating these,

                               a dh
                                                                     (14.24)
                             1 - a p
International Specialization                                            251


Eliminating d E and dG from (14.21), (14.22), and (14.24), we derive the
required expression for dzuldh:


dh     pA            1 - P         1-                               (14.25)

Full details of the derivation are given in appendix 14.1, where an ex-
pression for A is also given.
  With constant returns in agriculture, the symmetric equilibrium is
stable or unstable according to whether diulljh is negative or positive.
The term A in the denominator of equation (14.25) is negative providing
a < p, the no-black-hole condition. Stability therefore depends on the
numerator of (14.25), which takes exactly the same form as the analo-
gous symmetry-breaking equation of chapter 5 equation (5.27). As in
that chapter, the point of symmetry breaking can be found explicitly,
using the definition of Z,and it is

                                                                    (14.26)

   Pulling together the sustain condition and the symmetry-breaking
condition, we now know what the structure of equilibria must be. At
high transport costs, the symmetric equilibrium is unique, because each
country must have manufacturing to supply its local consumers. At
low transport costs, forward and backward linkages dominate, and
manufacturing agglomerates in a single country. And there is an inter-
mediate range (between the sustain and the break values) at which
there are three stable equilibria. The bifurcation diagram of chapter 5
(figure 5.4) applies, with the single modification that the vertical axis is
now the share of manufacturing in employment in one of the countries
(either hl or h2).

14.3 Agglomeration and National Inequalities

In the preceding section we made two assumptions (A’ = 1 and p <
V 2 ) that combined to ensure wage equality between countries, even

when one country had a labor demand from manufacturing and the
other did not. More generally, however, we might expect an expansion
in manufacturing employment to raise wage rates. How does this
change the analysis? We answer this question in two stages. First we
try maintaining the assumption that the marginal product of labor in
agriculture is constant but let p > V 2 , and second (in the next section)
252                                                             Chapter 14


we let the marginal product of labor in agriculture increase smoothly
as labor is withdrawn.
   If manufacturing expenditure exceeds half of income, then manufac-
turing cannot all be fitted into a single economy at equal wages in both
countries. If the world economy tries to concentrate manufacturing,
wages in the country with the incipient manufacturing concentration
will be bid up. And because of this wage differential, some manufactur-
ing activity may continue to take place in the other economy.
   To analyze this more systematically, consider first the symmetric
equilibrium and the point at which symmetry is broken. Analysis of
this is exactly as in the previous section. Because we are maintaining
the assumption that A’(1 - 1,)= 1 and A”(1 - h,) = 0, wages are equal
to unity in the neighborhood of the symmetric equilibrium, and the
previous analysis applies. Equation (14.26) gives the point at which
symmetry is broken.
   Now consider the sustainability of a concentration of manufacturing
in country 1. Here we have to be a bit careful about defining what we
mean by ”concentration.” Both countries could be specialized-1 in
manufacturing, 2 in agriculture. However, for large p, in the more
usual configuration, one country produces only manufacturing, but
there is also a smaller-scale (and lower-wage) manufacturing sector in
the other. Let us consider only that case, that is, a case in which equilib-
rium is determined by equations (14.6)-(14.11);but whereas previously
we posited h, = 2p, w1 = 1, and h2 = 0, we now tie the model down
by positing h, = 1 and hZ< 1 (which by (14.13) implies zu2 = 1).This
situation is not an equilibrium when it implies a country 1 wage of
less than 1, so that workers would defect to the agricultural sector. That
is, the sustain point is that point at which, given hl = 1 and 7u2 = 1,
we also have w 1= I, so that beyond this point country 1 no longer
specializes in manufacturing. There is no simple analytical expression
for this sustain point, so we instead illustrate the structure of equilibria
numerically.
   Figure 14.4 traces out equilibrium values of h, and h, as functions
of the level of trade costs. Solid lines are stable equilibria and dashed,
unstable. At high values of T the symmetric equilibrium is unique and
stable. As T drops below level T ( S ) , specialization of one country (we
assume country 1)in manufacturing becomes sustainable. At T(B), the
symmetric equilibrium becomes unstable. The qualitative configura-
tion of the sustain and break points is as in section 14.2, but the higher
share of manufacturing in consumption means that, although country
International Specialization                                                                 253




    0.5




   0.0
          I     .   ’   .     ”   ’   .   ‘      .   ’   .   ’     .   ’   .   ”     ”
          1.o               1.2           I .4               1.6               1.8       T
Figure 14.4
The bifurcation diagram


1 is specialized in manufacturing, country 2 also produces some manu-
facturing, as illustrated by the positive levels of h2 in the figure.
   Figure 14.5 gives the real wages, o1= w 1Gip-”, o2= Z U ~ G $ ~ - corre-
                                                                        ~’,
sponding to figure 14.4 (and reports only stable equilibria). We see that
agglomeration of manufacturing in country 1 causes a discontinuous
upward jump in real wages in country 1 and a fall in country 2. Two
forces underlie these real income changes. First, the labor demand gen-
erated by manufacturing raises the country 1 wage, measured relative
to agricultural goods. And second, the country with manufacturing has
a lower cost-of-living index, because it does not have to pay transport
costs on imported manufactures. This effect amplifies the country 1
gain and also drives the decline in real wages in country 2. The size
of the wage gap between the two countries may continue to increase
over some interval of trade costs. Eventually, however, the wage gap
declines with transport costs; in the limit, as these costs go to 0, factor
prices are equalized.
   The structure of equilibria shown in these figures suggests a story
we have referred to elsewhere (Krugman and Venables 1995) as ”His-
tory of the World, Part I.” Call country 1 North and country 2 South,
and imagine a long-term secular fall in transport costs (first caravels,
then steamships and railroads, then air freight, . . .). From an initial
254                                                              Chapter 14


0   1   7   0 2



            1 .o




            0.9



            0.8




Figure 14.5
Real wages


position in which the two countries are identical, an international divi-
sion of labor spontaneously arises through a process of uneven devel-
opment. North immediately gains from this division of labor, while
South, which suffers deindustrialization, initially loses. The world
economy then necessarily has a core-periphery structure, with manu-
facturing concentrated in North; low wages in South are not enough
to attract manufacturing because of the lack of sufficient forward and
backward linkages. Eventually, however, further reductions in trans-
port costs move the world into a globalization phase. The value of
proximity to customer and supplier firms diminishes as transport costs
fall, and so the sustainable wage gap between North and South nar-
rows; in the limit of perfectly costless trade, we go to factor price equal-
ization. During this globalization phase North may suffer a real as well
as a relative income decline, as illustrated in figure 14.5.
  The qualitative structure of equilibria in figures 14.4 and 14.5 is gen-
eral, as is the discontinuous increase in real income in North and the
fall in South at the point where specialization occurs. Figures 14.6 and
14.7 illustrate the quantitative dependence of real wages on parame-
ters. In figure 14.6, the strength of linkages is increased: The parameter
a,giving the share of intermediates in production, is increased from
0.4 to 0.5. This increases the range of transport costs at which agglomer-
                                                255




    0.6 -                       0 2




   1.o




   0.8



         1.o     1.2     1.4   1.6    1.8   T
Figure 14.7
Real wages with high p
256                                                               Chapter 14


ation occurs and also the absolute magnitude of the wage gap. It also
creates a range of transport costs at which hZ = 0. This shows up as
the flat segment of the ml curve: Transport cost reductions do not
change real income in country 1 when there is no import competition.
In figure 14.7, a is returned to its previous value, and p, the share of
manufactures in consumption, is increased (from 0.55 to 0.7). This
allows country 2 to hold more manufacturing. It also means that coun-
try 1 does not suffer a real wage decline in the globalization phase.
Real wages increase steadily as transport costs are reduced, because
country 1 imports a substantial share of its manufactures, and so bene-
fits from the falling transport costs.

14.4 Decreasing Returns in Agriculture

We now generalize further by making agricultural wages a decreasing
function of agricultural employment, that is, making the production
function A ( l - A,) strictly concave. This means that the labor supply
curve to manufacturing always slopes upward. An expansion of manu-
facturing employment may increase the manufacturing wage, but it
also increases the agricultural wage, so the stability of equilibrium de-
pends on the relative movements of these wages.
   Analysis of this is a generalization of the work already done in sec-
tion 14.2. The stability of the equilibrium depends on the sign of
           h ,du2/dh2),given by
d ~ ~ / d (=

                                                                      (14.27)

which is equation (14.17). In section 14.2, agricultural technology was
such that the second term was 0. It is now strictly negative. How does
this affect our results?
   The first point to note is that the symmetric equilibrium must now
be stable at very low levels of transport costs. We know from the pre-
ceding analysis that as T -+1, so d z o l / d h l -+ 0 (equation (14.25), with
Z + 0), while A” remains negative. A verbal argument makes the intu-
ition clear and also provides a stronger result. The value of forward
and backward linkages with local firms goes to 0 as transport costs
become very small, so as T + 1, manufacturing wages in the two coun-
tries tend to equality. But with a strictly concave agricultural produc-
tion function, agricultural wages are the same only if agricultural
International Specialization                                         257


employment is the same in both countries, h, = hZ.Thus, as T -+ 1, the
equilibrium with dispersed activity is not only stable, but also unique.
  This suggests that as we reduce T, we may go through the following
stages. At very high T, activity is dispersed, and the symmetric equilib-
rium is stable and unique. At intermediate levels of T, agglomeration
takes over, and the symmetric equilibrium is unstable. But at low
enough levels of T, the symmetric equilibrium becomes stable once
again. This pattern is confirmed by the simulations we undertake using
an agricultural production function taking the form

A ( l - h,) = rlE(?)',                                           (14.28)

where is the share of labor in agriculture, and K is a constant chosen
such that the symmetric equilibrium agricultural wage is unity. ( K
could be interpreted as the stock of an agriculture-specific factor such
as land.)
  The simulation output is reported in the bifurcation diagram (figure
14.8), which shows the share of manufacturing employment in the two
countries as a function of trade costs. Figure 14.9 depicts the corre-
sponding real-wage information, showing how the country with the




        1
       1.o                       1.2                  1.4   T
Figure 14.8
Bifurcation with diminishing returns in agriculture
258                                                              Chapter 14




Figure 14.9
Real wages with diminishing returns in agriculture


larger share of manufacturing has the higher manufacturing wage
and the lower consumer price index, generating the real-wage paths
illustrated.
   Appendix 14.1 analyzes the two bifurcations. We find that the equa-
tion for the break point, at which the symmetric equilibrium goes from
stability to instability, is quadratic in T. Providing the absolute value
of A” is not too large, there are two positive real roots. The larger is the
absolute value of A”, the narrower is the range in which agglomeration
occurs, and if this value is large enough, the symmetric equilibrium is
stable for all values of trade costs.6
   The presence of these two distinct break points confirms our conjec-
ture that, as transport costs are reduced, the equilibrium goes through
three stages. We believe that this nonmonotonic effect of transport costs
on industrial location is actually a fairly general insight. It is similar
to our findings in chapter 7, in which trade costs in agriculture provide
a countervailing force to agglomeration. At high trade costs, the
dominant force in determining location is the need to be close to final
consumption, preventing any strong geographical concentration of
manufacturing. At low trade costs, the dominant determinant of loca-
tion is wage costs, again mandating dispered manufacturing to keep
labor costs down. Therefore the linkage forces that can cause agglomer-
International Specialization                                           259


ation are strongest relative to other forces at intermediate values of
trade costs. Thus there is, we believe typically, an inverted-ll relation-
ship between trade costs and geographic concentration of industry.
   Figures 14.8 and 14.9 are also novel insofar as the bifurcations are
smooth pitchfork bifurcations, not the tomahawk variant we usually
find. This makes little difference to our main qualitative results-the
presence of a range of values at which manufacturing agglomeration
occurs. It arises because of the way we have modeled agriculture in
equation (14.28). Evidently, with an iso-elastic production function,
there will always be some agriculture in both locations, because the
marginal product rises without limit as agricultural employment goes
to 0. It turns out that with the particular functional form for agriculture
given in equation (14.28), the curvature of the agricultural marginal
product schedule is such that the bifurcation is a p i t ~ h f o r k . ~

14.5   Conclusions

In a world of countries-which we think of as geographical units that
can trade, but among which labor does not move-agglomeration in
the sense of population concentration cannot occur. However, linkages
among industrial sectors can still lead to a process of industrial concen-
tration that is conceptually very similar to the stories about agglomera-
tion we told in our regional and urban analyses. And the geographic
structure of production in the international economy, like that within
nations, can experience qualitative changes when parameters, espe-
cially the level of transport costs, change.
   So far we have shown that a geographical approach to world trade
can indeed be conducted using the same tools we have applied to cities
and regions, and that structure of this analysis is indeed at an abstract
level almost exactly the same as what we have done before. There are,
however, two important differences. First, where linkages in parts I1
and I11 led to an unequal distribution of population across space, we
now see the possibility not only of an uneven distribution of manufac-
turing, but also of the spontaneous emergence of inequalities in wage
rates and living standards. We would not claim that this story is the
sole or even the major explanation of the division of the world’s nations
into rich and poor, but it does offer the interesting suggestion that un-
even development may have been a predictable consequence of grow-
ing world integration. Even more interesting, the same analysis
260                                                            Chapter 14


suggests that the recent narrowing of income gaps between the ad-
vanced nations and (some) developing countries might be partially at-
tributable to the continuation of the same trend toward integration:
Declining trade costs first produce, then dissolve, the global inequality
of nations.
   All this is obviously a mere speculation based on an appealing but
untested model. And there are other possible stories, even within a
geographical framework, about the spread of industry to newly emerg-
ing economies; such an alternative story is the subject of chapter 15.

Appendix 14.1: Symmetry Breaking

In this appendix we derive the point of symmetry breaking for the
model. To find the point at which symmetry is broken, we must differ-
entiate around the symmetric equilibrium and compute d v /dh. From
the text we have equations (14.21), (14.22), and (14.24):

                                                                  (14.21)


                                                                  (14.22)


                                                                  (14.24)

Eliminating d E / p , the first two of these equations can be written as

[o(l - a ) - Z[p(1 - a ) + a] ao + (1 - o ) Z
       [o(l - a ) - 1 ] Z          1 - o + aoz    1               (14A.1)



from which

dzu - - Z
- - __ [a(2o - 1) - Z(o(1       + a2)- l ) ]
dh    FA
                                                                  (14A.2)
International Specialization                                                             261


where the A is the determinant, so


       + Z[a(20 - 1) + p(O - 1)(1- a)]+ o(1 - o)(l - a)
                                                                                   (14A.3)
   --
   -       1
                  K ' M P - a) -             - P)(a + Cl(1 - a))]
      (1 - P)'


The determinant A is negative for all Z E [0,1] if the no-black-hole con-
dition is satisfied, a < p.
  The required stability condition is the change in manufacturing
wages compared to agricultural given a change d h , that is,

                                                                                   (14A.4)

   If A" = 0, then the condition under which d u / d h = 0 comes from
(14A.2), giving a unique break point value of 2 and hence of T (com-
pare (14A.2) with (5A.5)).
   If A" < 0 then d u / d h < 0 at Z = 0 and Z = 1. The equation for
d u / d h is a quadratic in Z that has two positive real roots for small
enough A".

Appendix 14.2: Simulation Parameters

Figures 14.1-14.3: o = 5, a = 0.5, p = 0.4, T = 3, 1.5, and 2.15
respectively.
Figures 14.4-14.5: o = 5, a = 0.4, p = 0.55.
Figure 14.6: o = 5, a = 0.5, p = 0.55.
Figure 14.7: o = 5, a = 0.4, p = 0.7.
Figures 14.8-14.9: o = 5, a = 0.4, p = 0.55, q = 0.95.

Notes

1. The production function for a single firm in country s is, instead of F + cq\ = I , (equa-
tion 4.18),
262                                                                              Chapter 14


where I , is labor input and i nis the input of each variety produced in country r. The
final term on the right-hand side is a CES aggregator on intermediate inputs, analogous
to the quantity index given in equation 4.2.
2. This is a formulation due to Ethier (1982), drawing on Dixit and Stiglitz (1977),and
has been widely used in new growth theory.
3. For consumers, the price index is an expenditure function, and for producers, it is a
cost function.
4. This is within a single manufacturing industry. We shall come to multi-industry
settings in chapter 15 and make the distinction between upstream and downstream
industries.
5. At this point, equality of supply and demand for manufactures means that h2 =
2p - 1. The sustain value of T can be found by using these facts in equilibrium conditions
(14.6)-(14.11).

6. At large enough IA”I, the roots are imaginary. At lower values of p, the curves on
this figure are shifted apart, and there may be an interval within which A, = 0.
7. Recall from the appendix to chapter 3 that the character of a bifurcation depends on
the curvature of the schedule relating the level of h to its rate of change. At the critical
point, we know that we have



The critical point is a point of inflection, so



The function goes from concave to convex if



and conversely if the expression is positive. It turns out that d z ~ ( / d h ;is negative. The
pitchfork bifurcation arises when the function goes from convex to concave, so occurs
if the fourth derivative of the agricultural production function is positive and sufficiently
large to overturn the first term. A positive fourth derivative, in turn,is a property that
just happens to hold for the iso-elastic form of the agricultural production function that
we used in our examples.
15                                    Economic Development
                                      and the Spread of Industry




Any economist familiar with the standard argument that trade leads
to factor price equalization realizes that he must somehow account for
the stark fact that factor prices-above all wages-are very much izot
equalized. To make sense of the world, we need to have a story about
how nations that participate in the same markets can pay wages that
differ by a factor of five, ten, or twenty. On the other hand, the most
striking feature of the world economy in the last generation has been
the narrowing of the gap between at least some low-wage countries
and the advanced West. For example, wages in Taiwan went from only
6 percent of the U.S. level as recently as 1975 to 34 percent in 1995; in
South Korea, the numbers were 6 and 43 percent respectively. What
can explain both the origins of such international inequality and the
ability of some countries to move rapidly up the economic ladder?
   In chapter 14 we already saw one answer, in our ”History of the
World, Part I”: In a model in which linkages give rise to external econo-
mies, a secular decline in transport costs can first create a world di-
vided between a wealthy core and a poorer periphery, then cause that
division to collapse. In this chapter we pursue an alternative though
closely related story in which the source of international economic in-
equality is the same, but a secular rise in the demand for manufactured
goods drives change. In brief, the story runs as follows: We imagine a
world economy in which some one region has initially managed to
get a self-reinforcing advantage in manufacturing, an advantage that
allows it to pay higher wages than other countries. Over time, however,
the world’s demand for manufactures rises. This increases the level of
activity in the manufacturing region, reinforcing the agglomeration
and also increasing wages. As this process continues, the wage gap
between regions may become too large to be sustainable. It is then
profitable for individual firms to set up manufacturing in a second
264                                                            Chapter 15


region, which begins to develop self-reinforcing advantages of its own
and thus has a surge in wages. Then at a later date, a third region goes
through the same process, and so on. This story not only offers a possi-
ble explanation of rapid growth in the Third World, but also offers a
clue as to why at any given time certain regions of the developing
world appear to be surging while others lag behind.
   A further elaboration of the model allows for multiple industries that
differ in labor intensity, input-output structure, and so on. In this case
we observe the emergence of a characteristic life cycle of development,
in which countries that industrialize first do so by developing indus-
tries that are especially labor-intensive or that are weakly linked to
other sectors, before eventually developing a mature industrial struc-
ture. In some cases we see in particular a pattern reminiscent both of
the past industrialization of Japan and current industrialization in
China and other low-wage manufacturing exporters: On the way to
full maturity they experience a temporary phase of producing labor-
intensive, weak-linkage goods not only for their home market but for
the world as a whole.

15.1 Growth and Sustainable Wage Differentials

We begin with a model that is as close as possible to that introduced
in chapter 14. As before, we suppose a two-sector economy in which
the presence of intermediate goods creates forward and backward link-
ages within manufacturing. But we now add a growth process that acts
as the driving force behind economic change. Because we are con-
cerned with the spatial implications of growth, not with its origins,
we take this process as exogenous: We simply assume that technical
progress steadily augments all primary factors. We can put this in the
model by measuring primary factors in efficiency units and denoting
this efficiency level L. Thus L A , and (1 - h,)L are the number of effi-
ciency units of labor operating in country Y manufacturing and agricul-
ture respectively, and w,now denotes the wage per efficiency unit of
labor.
  We also change the formulation of consumer demand, For our story,
we need demand for manufactures to increase more rapidly than po-
tential supply in the currently industrialized nations. But increases in
L raise both supply and demand. To get some action out of growth,
we replace Cobb-Douglas consumer preferences between agriculture
and manufactures with a formulation under which manufactures ac-
Economic Development and the Spread of Industry                       265


count for a growing share of expenditure as income rises. The simplest
formulation that does the job is a linear expenditure system in which
consumers are assumed to have a minimal "subsistence" level of food
consumption. Thus if a consumer's income (measured in terms of
agriculture) is Y, all of that individual's income below some level Y
is spent on agriculture. Of income above Y , we assume that a pro-
portion p is spent on manufactures, and 1 - p on agriculture.' The
consequence of this assumption is that as L increases through time,
so does household income (each household is endowed with more
efficiency units of primary factors), and so therefore does the share
of income devoted to manufactures. This expansion of demand for
manufactures relative to agriculture provides the driving force in our
analysis.
  The following equations rewrite the model of chapter 14 to incorpo-
rate these assumptions. Writing these equations for an arbitrarily large
number of countries, the price indices are,

                                                                   (15.1)

Notice that it is employment in efficiency units, LA,, that is relevant,
because this determines the number of varieties of manufactures pro-
duced. The wage equations, for efficiency units of labor, are

                                                                   (15.2)
  1-a

Expenditure on manufactures comes from our representative con-
sumer and from firms demanding intermediates,

                                                                   (15.3)

in which the fact that demand for manufactures comes only from in-
come in excess of Y modifies the consumer demand term. Income in
each country is given by
Y, ZurLhr + A ( l - hr)L,
   1                                                               (15.4)
where the first term is income from manufacturing employment, and
the second is the value of agricultural output. The rate of technical
progress is the same in both sectors and for all primary factors (land
as well as labor), so L enters both terms in (15.4) multiplicatively, and
266                                                              Chapter 15


the agricultural wage per efficiency unit of labor is A'(1 - hr).We as-
sume throughout the chapter that A ( l - h,) is strictly concave, as in
section 14.4, so agriculture always operates in all countries. An econ-
omy that also has manufacturing has the same wages per efficiency
unit of labor in both sectors, so
10, = A'(1 -   A,).                                                   (15.5)
   We start from a position in which manufacturing is concentrated in
a subset of countries, and we want to find the point at which it starts
spilling out from this existing industrial center to other countries. We
can of course do this by finding the sustain point. Suppose that there
are just two countries and that manufacturing is concentrated in coun-
try 1, so hl > 0 and h, = 0. With this pattern of specialization we can
derive relative manufacturing wages in the two countries, from (15.1)
and (15.2), as

                                                                      (15.6j

Country 1 has r o l = A'(1 - XI). In country 2, h2 = 0, and this is sustain-
able provided 71'2 5 A'(l), so the sustain condition takes the form




   This is of course similar to sustain conditions we have derived in
other chapters, although it contains endogenous variables on the right-
hand side. We can derive the equilibrium values of these variables in
a fairly straightforward way. Since production in country 1 meets total
demand for manufactures, the country 1 wage bill satisfies
~0lLh1= (1 - a)(E1+ € 2 ) .                                           (15.8)
Expenditure on manufactures in countries 1 and 2 are (from (15.3)and
(15.4), with h, = 0)



                                                                      (15.9)

so adding these and using them in (15.8),
Economic Development and the Spread of Industry                         267


 L
                                  111: A, = A2 > 0
2.0 -




1.6-




Figure 15.1
Break and sustain points


Zu,Lh,(l - p) = p[A(l)L + A ( l - h,)L - 2Y].                       (15.10)
(Although we have derived this equation via manufacturing expendi-
tures, it can also be interpreted as equality of supply and demand for
agriculture.) This equation, together with


determines wland h,. Expenditure levels in each country can then be
solved from (15.9), giving all the information needed to evaluate the
sustain condition, (15.7).
    The curve S S in figure 15.1 illustrates the sustain curve. Axes of this
figure are the parameters T and L, and the curve is the locus of these
parameters at which the concentrated equilibrium (with manufactur-
ing wages, employment levels, and expenditures given by (15.9)-
(15.11)) satisfy the sustain condition (15.7) with equality. Below the
curve, concentration of manufacturing in country 1 is sustainable, and
above it, it is not.
   The hump shape of the sustain curve reflects that fact that, as usual,
it is relatively difficult to sustain agglomeration at very low and at very
high levels of trade costs, exactly as we found in sections 14.3 and 14.4.
The role of forward and backward linkages can be seen by looking at
268                                                              Chapter 15


the equation for the sustain curve, (15.7).2Forward linkages are cap-
tured by the term T-"", which represents the fact that firms in country
2 have to pay T more for their intermediate inputs than do firms in
country 1, and this penalty is worse the higher is T. The term in square
brackets captures backward-linkage effects. Raising T switches expen-
diture in the country 2 market toward country 2 firms, and has the
opposite effect in the country 1 market.
   Our focus in this chapter, however, is not on changing trade costs,
but on changes in L, the efficiency parameter. Figure 15.1 indicates that
as L increases, agglomeration of manufacturing in country 1 eventually
becomes unsustainable, because when y > 0, raising L increases both
zu, and h l , as can be established by totally differentiating (15.10) and
(15.11).The reason is that income growth increases demand for manu-
factures relative to agriculture, and this manufacturing growth is con-
centrated in country 1. This then has two effects on the sustain
condition. One the one hand, because it increases the country 1 wage,
it makes it more attractive for manufacturing to set up in country
2. But on the other hand, precisely because country 1 is manu-
facturing more and paying higher wages, the share of country 1 in
world manufacturing expenditure rises, and this strengthens back-
ward linkages and reinforces the existing agglomeration. In terms of
the sustain equation, E l / ( E , + E 2 ) rises, the corresponding country 2
share declines, and because Top' > TIP*,the term in square brackets
decreases.
   The net effect therefore depends on the tension between changing
relative wages and stronger backward linkages. In figure 15.1 the for-
mer dominate, pushing the economy through the S S curve. However,
this need not necessarily be the case. For example, if the share of manu-
factures in consumption, p, is very low, then the limiting values of h,
and zi+ as L -+ 00 are relatively small, so the sustain point is never
reached. (In terms of figure 15.1, the SS curve has two sections that
become vertical, so that there is a range of T below SS for all L). Gener-
ally, the S S curve is higher (hence agglomeration is sustainable for
longer) the smaller is the share of manufactures, p, and the larger the
input-output linkage, a; higher a means that a larger wage differential
is required to compensate for linkages foregone in moving out of the
existing manufacturing center.
   As we pass through the S S curve, what happens? It depends on
whether the bifurcation is a tomahawk or a pitchfork. In the former
case there is a discontinuity, and the economies jump to full conver-
Economic Development and the Spread of Industry                         269



0
1  I0



    1.1'



    1. o



    0.9.


               I                         I1           I11


Figure 15.2
Relative real wages, two country model


gence, hl = hZ.In the latter, hl and h2 move continuously with L, so
we enter a region in which hl > hZ > 0, as illustrated in region I1 in
the figure. Moving up across the region has the effect of raising h,, and
we eventually reach a point of full convergence, h, = h, > 0. The locus
of such points is the B B curve, which is, provided the bifurcation is a
pitchfork, simply the point of symmetry breaking. (We are now passing
through this point in the opposite direction from earlier chapters; it is
now the point of symmetry restoration.)
   We can now pull all these elements together and see the develop-
ment path these economies follow if the technical efficiency factor, L,
continues to increase. This is best illustrated by tracing out relative real
wages (the real wage in each country relative to the average for both)
as L increases, and is shown in figure 15.2, which takes as given a value
of T = 1.3.
   In phase I, when L is in the interval I on the horizontal axis, manufac-
turing is concentrated in country 1, and the country 1 wage is higher
than the country 2 wage (both in real terms and in terms of agricultural
output). Growth of L raises demand for manufactures, and this builds
up pressure in the country 1 manufacturing agglomeration and causes
contraction of country 1 agriculture and an increase in its wage. In this
phase, we therefore see a divergence of economic structure and income
levels between countries.
270                                                            Chapter 15


   Country 2 industrialization takes place during phase 11. It starts
when the wage gap between countries is large enough for it to be
profitable for some firms to move out of country 1, even though they
forego linkage benefits with other firms. Increasing L within phase I1
narrows the wage gap between countries, and this narrowing occurs
at an increasing rate. The reason is of course that as industry expands
in country 2 it creates its own linkages, feeding an accelerating process
of convergence. During this process the share of industry in country
1 falls and real wages per worker may increase or decrease, depending
on the alternative employment opportunities (here represented by the
shape of the agricultural production function), the change in the price
index arising from availability of cheaper imported manufactures, and
the underlying rate of technical change.
   Finally, as L increases still further, we enter phase 111. This is
the mature phase, at which point the economies have attained full
convergence.

15.2 Many Industries and Many Countries

We now turn to a situation in which there are many countries and
many industries. Having many countries allows us to address the geo-
graphical pattern of spread of industry from country to country. If we
start in a situation where industry is concentrated in a single country,
does it spread evenly to all the others, or does it spread first to one,
then the next, and so on?
   Having many industries allows us to address a number of questions
concerning the industrial structure and trade patterns of countries dur-
ing their period of industrialization. Different industries face ties of
different strength to an existing agglomeration, through the linkage
benefits they receive, so what can be said about which industries are
first to move out of an established agglomeration? From this, can we
identify how a country’s industrial structure is likely to change during
its industrialization phase, and also during its mature phase, as it loses
industrial activity to newly industrializing economies? Because indus-
tries differ in the linkages they create for other industries, how does
the pace and character of industrialization depend on which industries
are the first to start to relocate in the industrializing economy?
   We have tried to gain some insight into the answers to these ques-
tions by conducting simulation analysis in a five-country and seven-
industry model. The structure is exactly as in the previous section, and
Economic Development and the Spread of Industry                         271


the generalization to many industries is given in appendix 15.1. We
assume that the countries are identical in their underlying structure of
preferences, technologies, and endowments, and start from a position
in which all industry is concentrated in a single country-call it coun-
try 1. We then trace the process of the spread of industry to the other
economies. The seven industries have different characteristics, and
could potentially differ in the extent of their increasing returns, in their
transport costs, in the sources of demand for their output, and in the
composition of their inputs. To try to isolate some of the key forces at
work, we focus on the effect of differences in industries' input-output
coefficients and proceed by tracing the industrialization process under
a series of different hypothetical input-output matrices.

15.2.2      Difiering Labor lntensities

The simplest case, with which we begin, is one in which industries are
identical in all key respects except their labor intensity.3Industry 1 is
the most labor intensive, and industry 7 the least. Figures 15.3and 15.4
present the evolution of three of the economies under this condition.'
   The first question is, because there are several countries, does indus-
try spread to countries simultaneously or sequentially? We can answer


Relative
real
wages
         1.1




         1.01                    I                           I
                                I                            I




         0.9 -
               -   1   I   I1    I    111   I     IV


Figure 15.3
Relative real wages, multicountry model
272                                                                     Chapter 15




1



                                           I
                                       I
                                   I
                                  #

                     S2,     I’                                 I
                     I
                         ,                                 s3, /
                                                           0
                 0                                    4




1



                                            I
                                           I
                                       I
                                      II


                         s2 :
                              I
                                  I                            s3   ;
0’


Figure 15.4
Industry shares; top panel most labor intensive industry


this by looking at the evolution of relative real wages per efficiency
unit of labor as a function of L, the efficiency level,s as we do in figure
15.3, on the horizontal axis of which the main phases of development
are marked out. In phase I, all industry is located in country 1, and
there is a wage gap between country 1 and countries 2 and 3. Increases
in L increase the magnitude of this gap, until it becomes profitable for
some industry to relocate-and phase I1 begins. Phase I1 is the period
in which country 2 starts to industrialize, and we see the wage gap
between countries 1 and 2 narrowing at an increasing rate during the
interval, until the two countries converge.
  The behavior of the country 3 wage relative to the country 2 wage
during this period gives the answer to our question about whether the
Economic Development and the Spread of Industry                        273


 spread of industry is uniform to all countries or consecutive, spreading
 to each country in turn. At the beginning of phase I1 both countries 2
 and 3 start to industrialize; the 0 2 / Gand 03/0  curves coincide for a
 very short interval at the beginning of phase 11. However, as linkages
 within countries 2 and 3 become stronger, the equilibrium in which
 they both have the same industrial structure becomes unstable. If one
 country gets marginally ahead, its advantage is amplified, and the
 other country drops behind, which is what we see occurring. Although
 in the present framework there is nothing to say which country takes
 off and which lags (we simply label them 2 and 3 respectively), the
 presence of even small differences between the countries might have
 large effects, by giving one country an edge over the other at the crucial
 moment.
   By the end of phase 11, country 2 has completely caught up with
country 1. There is a wage gap between these countries and country
3, and this gap starts to widen. During this phase (marked as 111) manu-
facturing employment in country 1 and 2 is increasing, and this drives
the increasing wage gap. At some point the gap becomes too large to
be sustainable, and country 3's process of industrialization starts
(phase IV). Country 3 wages start to catch up with those in 1 and 2,
in an accelerating (and eventually discontinuous) process.
   The main point to draw from this figure is that the process of indus-
trialization is not uniform across countries. Instead, it proceeds in a
series of waves, with countries successively undergoing rapid industri-
alization as each establishes a critical mass of industry. Successful in-
dustrialization, however, raises wages-given our continuing growth
of demand for manufactures-and thus eventually prepares the way
for the spread of industry to yet another country.
   Figure 15.4 gives some of the industrial detail associated with this
process. There are seven industries, and the three panels of figure 15.4
illustrate industries 1, 4 and 7-the most, the average, and the least
labor intensive. The horizontal axis is once again the technical effi-
ciency level, L, whereas the vertical axis is each country's share in the
output of the industry. (Thus the three lines in each panel, s,, i = 1,2,3,
sum to unity, the height of the panel.) There are two main things to
note from this figure. First, the most labor-intensive industry is the
first to leave country 1 and become established in 2 and 3-un-
surprisingly, because high wages cause the relocation of industry.h
Second, later industries-the less labor-intensive industries-enter
more rapidly than the earlier ones, and possibly discontinuously,
274                                                              Chapter 15


because the earlier industries create forward and backward linkages
that facilitate entry of firms in other industries. This accounts for accel-
era ting industrialization.

15.2.2 Forward and Backward Linkages

We now turn to the way in which the interindustry structure of the
input-output matrix determines the process of the spread of industry.
To simplify the various ways in which industries’ input output coeffi-
cients may differ we proceed in several stages.

Sales Orientation
The first possibility is to suppose that all industries have the same cost
structure but differ in their sales orientation: the extent to which their
sales go to firms or to final consumers. In terms of the coefficients of
the interindustry transactions part of the input-output matrix, all col-
umns are identical, but the rows differ. Because industries all use the
same inputs, they all creak the same backward linkages (and receive
the same forward linkages). However, an industry with small row
elements receives few backward linkages (and creates few forward
ones), because most of its output is used as final consumption, not as
intermediates.’
   The pattern of development in this case is that consumption-oriented
industries are the first to move from the established agglomeration.
Because a high proportion of demand for these industries’ output
comes from final demand, not from other firms, their demand is less
concentrated in country 1, making them the first to move away from
country 1. The overall pattern of development remains qualitatively
similar to that outlined for the case of differing labor intensities. Indus-
try spreads first to country 2, which fully converges to country 1, and
then spreads to country 3, and so on.

Input Orientation
What if each industry has the same pattern of sales to industrial and
final consumers but different intermediate input requirements? In
terms of the input-output matrix, rows are now identical, but columns
differ, industries with small column elements drawing less of their in-
puts from other imperfectly competitive industries, and so benefiting
less from forward linkages and creating fewer backward linkages.8Un-
surprisingly, these industries with low intermediate input require-
Economic Development and the Spread of Industry                        275



ments are the first to leave; because they are less dependent on supply
from other firms, their location is more responsive to wage differences.

15.2.3 Upstream1Downstream

The preceding examples allowed industries to vary either in the for-
ward linkages (different rows) or the backward linkages (different col-
umns) they create. What if they differ in both? We shall look at two
possible cases. In the first, there is a perfect negative rank correlation
between the forward and backward linkages each industry creates.
There is then an unambiguous ”most upstream” industry, which cre-
ates strong forward linkages (its sales are industrially oriented, so it
has the largest row elements) and weak backward linkages (smallest
column elements). Conversely, there is a ”most downstream’’ industry
with weak forward linkages and strong backward linkages.’
   The changing industrial structure is illustrated in figure 15.5, in
which the top panel is the most upstream industry, and the bottom,
the most downstream. Two features stand out. First, the upstream in-
dustry is the first to leave. And second, each country’s development
process, once it has gotten under way, is extremely rapid. Both these
phenomena have the same fundamental cause. In this model forward
linkages are stronger than backward. The upstream industry uses few
manufactures as intermediates, and so receives few forward linkages,
which means it is the first industry to become detached from an ex-
isting agglomeration. However, it creates the strongest forward link-
ages, attracting entry by firms in other industries. This makes for the
rapid transition we see in figure 15.5.

15.2.4 Linkage Strength

In the converse case (the second of the two mentioned at the beginning
of the previous section), there is a perfect positive rank correlation be-
tween the forward and backward linkages each industry creates. We
can now rank industries from the most weakly linked-in both direc-
tions-through to the most strongly linked. Outcomes are shown in
figure 15.6.Unsurprisingly, the order of movement runs from the most
weakly linked (industry 1, top panel) through to the most strongly
linked.
   The process of development is slower in this case than in the preced-
ing one, as the first industries to move to a new country not only receive
276                                                           Chapter 15




                                                    L
Figure 15.5
Industry shares; top panel most upstream industry


few linkages but also transmit few. In this case we also get a kind of
”overshooting” of industrial structure, with newly industrializing
countries (country 2 then country 3) taking the largest share of world
output in sectors with weak linkages. Although all fully industrialized
countries have the same industrial structure (so the only trade between
them is intra-industry trade), during the transition phases the newly
industrializing country goes from being a net exporter of agriculture
to being a net exporter of weakly linked manufacturing goods, before
settling down to a mature trading pattern.
   Comparison of the fate of country 3 during phase I1 is also notewor-
thy. Whereas in the upstream/downstream case, country 3 has no in-
dustry during almost all this interval, in this case, country 3’s
development of the most weakly linked industry (industry 1)runs par-
allel to country 2’s for much of phase 11. The advantage of cheap coun-
try 3 labor is more valuable to industry 1 than the absence of its (weak)
links to other country 3 industry.
Economic Development and the Spread of Industry                       277




Figure 15.6
Industry shares; top panel most weakly linked industry


15.3 Conclusions

In this chapter, we have managed to use a slightly modified version
of our basic model to tell a story of breathtaking scope: a story in which
industrialization in the world economy occurs via a series of dramatic
developmental spurts, with a few countries at any given time experi-
encing surging production and wages while others are for the time
being left on the sidelines. Economic growth does not take the form of
smooth convergence of all countries in the world economy, but instead
there is a group of rich countries and a group of poor ones. Develop-
ment involves countries in turn making a fairly rapid transition from
one group to the other.
   When we consider multiple industries that vary in their characteris-
tics, we also get a suggestive, even exciting story about the natural life
cycle of development, in which countries typically develop through
278                                                                                      Chapter 15


the production of certain goods, then move "upscale" as they cede
those sectors to the nations that come after.
  As in chapter 14, some caution is in order. We do not really believe
that this model captures all or even most of the forces actually driv-
ing development in the modern economy. It does, however, show the
ability of a geographical approach to generate surprisingly com-
plex and yet strongly suggestive behavior out of very simple
elements.

Appendix 15.1: The Multicountry, Multi-industry Model

To derive the full multicountry and multi-industry model, it is helpful
to start, as we did in chapter 4, by focusing on numbers of firms and
prices of individual varieties, before making the substitutions to focus
on employment levels and wages. The number of countries is denoted
R, and subscripts refer to country. The number of industries is denoted
H , and industry-specific variables are superscripted.
   We start with the definition of the price index:

G: =    [2\=1
                                         l / ( l a)

                r ~ : ( y t T , , ~a)) ( '        , i = 1 . .. H , r , s = 1 . . . R .     (15A.1)

Prices charged by firms in country r industry i take the following form:


y ; = (zLQa'    nH



                /=I
                      (Gy.                                                                 (15A.2)

The right-hand side of (15A.2) is a Cobb-Douglas cost function over
labor and intermediates in which a'is the labor share, and a" gives
the value of the input of an intermediate good from industry j per unit
cost industry i. C, a''- a'I1, and if this holds with strict inequality,
then some of the agricultural good is used an intermediate, so that
input shares sum to unity. As previously, we choose units of measure-
ment for output such that the the markup cancels out with a cost
parameter.
  Demand in country s for a unit of industry i output produced in
country r is
                            (1-0)

                                                                                           (15A.3)
Economic Development and the Spread of Industry                     279


where E: is country s expenditure on the products of industry i. The
zero-profit condition sets an equilibrium output level per firm which,
by choice of units, is 1/ai,so

                                                                (15A.4)

Expenditure on each industry's products in each country is
                          H
E: = p'(Yr - Y ) +            a"n;pl,q;.                        (15A.5)
                        ]=I

The wage bill in each sector is
                                                                (15A.6)
and income is

Y,=   2
      )=1
            Lwl,hl, + A                                         (15A.7)

  As elsewhere, we can eliminate terms in 12: and pi. Using (15A.2) and
(15A.6), the price index, (15A.1) becomes

(G:)'-" =   2
            s=l
                  LhfT:;"(w:)l-Oa'   n
                                     H


                                     1=1
                                           (Gi)-aal'.           (15A.8)

Using (15A.2), (15A.3), and (15A.4) gives the wage equation:


                                                                (15A.9)

Expenditure, (15A.5), becomes

                                                               (15A.10)

These three, together with the income equation, (15A.7), determine the
equilibrium values of the price indices, wages, expenditure, and in-
come, given an allocation of labor across industries. In the long run,
this adjusts to equate wages across different sectors.
280                                                                  Chapter 15


Appendix 15.2: Simulation Parameters

All simulations use the equations in the text plus the iso-elastic agricul-
tural production function equation from chapter 14. Parameter values
are
Figure 15.1: (T = 5, a = 0.4, p = 0.9, q = 0.95, y = 0.67.
Figure 15.2: (T = 5, a = 0.4, p = 0.9, r\ = 0.95, y = 0.67,
             T = 1.3 and 1.5.
Figure 15.3-15.6: (T = 5, 11 = 0.94, 7 = 0.7, T = 1.2.
Figure 15.3, 15.4:
Demand shares:           p' = 0.086, i = 1 . . . 7.
Labor shares:            a' = 0.67, 0.61, 0.56, 0.51, 0.45, 0.4, 0.34.
Manufacturing
intermediate shares:     aIf   = 0.0471,   i = 1 . . . 7, j = 1 . . . 7.
Figure 15.5:
Demand shares: p' = 0.083, 0.088, 0.094, 0.10, 0.105, 0.111, 0.116.
Labor shares:    a' = 0.5, i = 1 . . . 7.
Manufacturing intermediate shares:
        :042    .049 .056 .063 .070 .077 .084-
        .038 .045 .051 .058 .064 .070 .077
        .035 .041 .047 .052 .058 .064               .070
        .031 .037 .042 .047 ,052 .058 .063
        .028 .032 .037 .042 .047 .051 .056
        .024 .029 .033 .037 .041 .045 ,049
        .021 .024 .028 .031 .035 .038 .042
This matrix is constructed so that industry 1 is upstream: Its column
elements are half those of industry 7, and its row elements are twice
those of industry 7.
Figure 15.6:
Demand shares: p' = 0.117, 0.112, 0.106, 0.101, 0.095, 0.090, 0.084.
Labor shares:        a' = 0.5, i = 1 . . . 7.
Economic Development and the Spread of Industry                                           28 1




          r021 .024 .028 .031 .035 .038                      .042'
          .024     .029 .033       .037 .041 .045 .049
          .028 .033 .037 .042 .047                  .051 .056

all   =   .031 .037 .042 .047 .052                  .058 .063
          .035 .041 .047 .052 .058 .064 .070
           .038 .045       .051 .058        .064    .070 .077
           .042 .049       .056 .063        .070    .077 .084

This matrix is constructed so that industry 1 is weakly linked. Both its
row and column coefficients are half those of industry 7.

Notes

1. Because preferences are no longer homothetic, construction of the aggregate demand
function requires that we assume that all households in the economy have the same
income, implying that rent from land is equally distributed.
2. It is easy to see how T enters the sustain condition, particularly because w l , h l , E , ,
and E: d o not depend on T (see equations (15.9)-(15.11)).
3. To make variations in labor input shares across industries consistent with the same
input-output coefficients among industrial sectors, we allow industries to use agriculture
as an input. Thus, an industry with a low labor input share has a correspondingly high
agriculture input share. Because the price of agriculture is the same in all countries, this
enables us to present the experiment in as pure a form as possible.
4. We concentrate on just three of the five economies, raising L only far enough for three
economies to industrialize.
5. Figure 15.3 gives wages in terms of the numeraire. Real wages trend upward because
of benefits from increasing product varieties and display larger cross-country differences.
The cross-country real-wage gap is larger because of international differences in price
indices.
6. Notice that at the beginning of phase 11, industry 1 starts to develop in country 3, but
because simultaneous development of both countries is unstable, it then drops back.
7. We scale industries such that they are all the same size in the initial equilibrium. The
demand parameter p'varies to offset the effects of cross-industry variations in intermedi-
ate demands.
8. All industries have the same labor input coefficients; once again, agriculture is used
as an input to ensure input shares sum to unity.
9. The actual input-output matrix and details of its construction are given in ap-
pendix 15.2.
This page intentionally left blank
16                                    Industrial Clustering




 Although grand issues such as the division of the world between high-
 and low-wage countries are both fascinating and a useful proving
 ground for our modeling approach, many of the likely policy issues
 involving economic geography are more modest in their scale. Few
people think that closer integration of the European market is likely
to deindustrialize either the periphery or the core of the continental
economy. On the other hand, there are real issues concerning the im-
pact of lower trade costs on which industries are located where. For
example, Europe currently maintains several distinct national centers
of production in many industries, from automobiles to financial ser-
vices, whereas the United States has a single dominant producing re-
gion. As the European market becomes more closely integrated, will
the polycentric geography of its industries unravel, giving way to
American-style concentration? Will high-technology industries concen-
trate in some European Silicon Valley? Will the financial services sector
maintain its current polycentricity, or will it concentrate in London (or
Frankfurt)? These are questions about i~dzistrinlclustrriizg; and they are
questions that can, we believe, usefully be addressed using our basic
approach to economic geography.
   To do so, we must enrich the economy’s input-output structure, and
in this chapter we focus on models with two or more manufacturing
sectors. This enables us to study the forces for agglomeration within
each industry as well as within the manufacturing sector as a whole.
It allows us to move from the question “Where will manufacturing
concentrate (if it does)?” to the question ”What manufacturing will be
concentrated where?”
   In this chapter we develop a series of models to address this ques-
tion. We now imagine economies that are already completely industri-
alized; the constant-returns agricultural sector is simply dropped from
284                                                           Chapter 16


the story. Of course, we still need to make some assumptions to keep
the analytics manageable; our main simplifying device is the imposi-
tion of symmetry both in the parameters of industries and on the as-
sumed input-output matrices. Not too surprisingly, these assumptions
allow us to address the question of specialization in ways that bear a
strong resemblance to the analysis of earlier chapters.
   The first model we develop has two countries, two industries, and
a single factor of production. We establish conditions under which each
industry agglomerates in a single country, and trace the implications
of changes in trade costs for industrial location and for real income. In
the second model, we add a second production factor, and thereby link
our approach to a 2 X 2 X 2 Heckscher-Ohlin trade model. Finally, we
move to having many industries. Each industry agglomerates in a sin-
gle country, but the number of industries in each country may be inde-
terminate. One country may have a higher proportion of world
industry than the other, and consequently also higher wages. We can,
however, define bounds on the sustainable degree of difference be-
tween the countries.

16.1 Industrial Clusters: The Evidence

A good deal of evidence indicates that industries are more highly clus-
tered than standard theories of comparative advantage might predict.
We have already alluded to Silicon Valley and some of the world's
financial districts, and industry centers such as Hollywood spring to
mind. Geographical clustering of industries is central to Porter's (1990)
view of competitive advantage. He undertook case studies of selected
industrial clusters-German printing equipment, Italian ceramic tiles,
Japanese robotics, and American health care equipment-and docu-
mented the clustering of internationally competitive industries in a
number of countries.
   Statistical evidence on geographic concentration is provided by
Krugman (1991b), who used United States data to look at industrial
localization. He computed locational Gini coefficients for three-digit
manufacturing industries across U.S. states and found surprisingly
high levels of concentration.' Taking as benchmark the U.S. automotive
industry (with half its employment still in the Detroit area), nearly half
of other industries have higher locational Gini coefficients. Kim (1995)
looked at a longer time series, 1860-1987, and showed that the rapid
Industrial Clustering                                                285


increase in industry regional specialization occurred before the First
World War, at the same time as the United States was developing its
transport system and becoming an integrated national economy. Since
the interwar years, regional specialization has been falling. This work
is nicely mirrored by work on European data, suggesting that as Euro-
pean integration has proceeded, regional concentration of industry and
divergence of countries’ industrial structures have recently increased
(Amiti 1997; Brulhart and Torstensson 1996).
   Of course, any theory of interregional or international trade and spe-
cialization is likely to predict that regions or countries have different
industrial structures, and the studies referred to above do not provide
a rigorous test of an agglomeration-based theory of location against
some other theory, although Ellison and Glaeser (1997) did test ag-
glomeration against chance. They pointed out that random chance may
mean that industries turn out to be concentrated, even if there are no
underlying forces for concentration-particularly if internal increasing
returns to scale are such that there are few plants in the industry. How-
ever, using U.S. state data, they found that the actual pattern of U.S.
plant location is considerably more concentrated than chance alone
would explain.
   Accepting then that industrial clustering is a significant empirical
phenomenon, let us move to constructing a theory to show how it can
emerge.

16.2 Industrial Clusters: The Model

We initially work with two countries, two industries, and a single fac-
tor of production, labor. Each country is endowed with one unit of
labor, which is assumed to be internationally immobile and may be
employed in either of the two manufacturing industries. (We assume
that there is no agricultural sector.) Keeping track of the two manufac-
turing industries requires some extra notation, which we handle by
using superscripts 1 and 2 to label the industries. To prevent notation
from getting too complex, we set out the model for a single country-
”Home”-and do not use country subscripts. Where it is necessary to
distinguish the ”Foreign” country, we do so by placing a tilde (-) over
the variable.
   The two industries are both monopolistically competitive as de-
scribed in earlier chapters. They are also symmetric in the following
286                                                                                Chapter 16


sense: On the demand side, both have identical consumer demand pa-
rameters, each taking half of consumers' expenditure and having the
same demand elasticity 0. Looking at technology, they both have the
same fixed costs and equilibrium firm scale, and utilize Cobb-Douglas
technologies employing labor and intermediate goods both from their
own industry and from the other industry. The input-output matrix, giv-
ing the value of different inputs per unit cost, has the following form:
                        Industry 1                  Industry 2
Industry 1             a                           Y
Industry 2             Y                            a
Labor                   P                           P
The interindustry part of the transactions matrix is symmetric, so for
each industry, inputs from the other industry account for a share y of
costs, and inputs from the same industry account for a share a.As we
will see, a > y means that intra-industry linkages are more powerful
than interindustry linkage. The share of labor is p, and of course, a +
p+y=1.
  Choosing units such that the marginal input requirement equals the
price-cost markup (c = p), this technology means that the prices
charged by Home firms in industry 1 and 2 are
p' = (ZU~)P(G')~(G~)''/                                                                (16.1)
y2 = ( ~ O ~ ) ~ ( G ~ ) ~ ( G ' ) ~ ,                                                 (16.2)
where G' and G2 are the Home price indices and w'and zu2 the Home
wage rates in each industry. The amount of Home labor employed in
each industry is h'; the Home labor force is unity, (h' + h2 = 1);and
we choose firm scale q* = 1/ p so that the total value of the wage bill
in industry i is zu'h' = pn'p'q* = rz'p'. We can now write expressions
for each industry's price index (see, for reference, equation (14.6)).They
take the form

                                                                                       (16.3)

G2 = [h2(zu2)'-@(G2)-"( G ') -P
                                                                                       (16.4)
        + j12(z52)1 - B " ( G 2 ) - a o ( C ' ) -1p 7- 1-a 1/ ( I -0)
                                                           I            .
Notice that each price index now depends on the price indices of both
industries in both countries (Home G' and Foreign      because these        ct),
Industrial Clustering                                                    287


feed into the costs and prices of manufacturing firms. Analogous equa-
tions can be written for the price indices in the Foreign economy, G'
and   c2.
   The wage equations in the Home economy take the form
                            P[E'(G')"-' + Z ? ( ~ ' ) O - '
[ ( W ' ) ~ ( C ' ) ~ ( G=' ) ~ ] ~                           T1-a],   (16.5)
                             P[E2(G2)"-'+ E2(G2)u-', T1-a].
[ ( W ' ) ~ ( G ' ) ~ ( G=' ) ~ ] ~                                    (16.6)
These are similar to the wage equations used previously (e.g., (14.8)
and (14.9))and can be thought of as determining the level of the wage
in each industry, w',w2,that gives a product price such that firms in
the industry make zero profits.
  Expenditure on each industry is given by


E'=[
         w'h'+ w2h2
                 2         ]+[     aw'h' + yw2h2
                                             p
                                                                       (16.7)


                                                                       (16.8)

Income is equal to the sum of the wage bills in each sector, and con-
sumer preferences are such that half of income goes to each industry,
thus giving the term in the first square brackets. The second bracketed
term gives the intermediate demands, depending on the wage bill in
each industry and technological coefficients.
   For a given allocation of labor between industries, h', h2,equations
(16.3)-(16.8)define the instantaneous equilibrium for the Home coun-
try, and an analogous set apply for the Foreign country, generating
twelve equations in twelve unknowns (price indices, wages, and ex-
penditure levels in both industries and both countries). In the long run,
labor moves between industries in response to wage differences,
although we maintain the assumption that labor is internationally
immobile.

16.3 Concentration or Dispersion?

What equilibria does this model support? One possibility is dispersion:
Each country has half of each industry. Another is geographic concen-
tration: clustering of firms in each industry, so that each industry local-
izes in only one country. We can apply our techniques to establish
circumstances in which these configurations are equilibria.
288                                                                     Chapter 16


   We start by looking at the sustainability of concentration. Although
this model seems quite complex, we have built in a double symme-
try that makes analysis relatively straightforward. The double sym-
metry comes from the fact that both the countries and the industries
are symmetric. To see the force of this assumption, suppose that indus-
try 1 is concentrated in Home, so h' = 1. Then Foreign has industry 2,
so
h' = h2 = 1, and A2 =         = 0.                                          (16.9)
This symmetry extends to other endogenous variables, so that values
for Home industry 1 are the same as those for Foreign industry 2, and
so on; that is,
G' =   cz, G' = CI,   €1   = E 2 , €2 = E l ,   101 = 252, 102 = rcl.      (16.10)
Of course, this implies that real wage levels in the two economies are
identical. Home workers are all employed in industry 1 earning zu',
and Foreign workers in industry 2 earning G2.
   We can now examine the equilibrium conditions when industry is
agglomerated and establish parameter values under which agglomera-
tion is sustainable. Looking first at the price indices, (16.3) and (16.4),
if industry 1 operates only in Home and industry 2 only in Foreign, we
have the following cross-country relationship between price indices,
G' = TG', GZ = TG2.                                                        (16.11)
Using the symmetry described in equation (16.10), this extends to
GI/GI     G'/GZ = G ? / G l = G 1 / G 2 = 'j".                             (16.12)
(The values of the price indices are given in appendix 16.1; the argu-
ment here requires only ratios.)
  Now taking the ratio of the two wage equations (dividing (16.6) by
(16.5) and using (16.12))gives


                                                                           (16.13)

If industries are concentrated, expend ture levels are

                                                (i + ;).                   (16.14)
Industrial Clustering                                                289


Using these in (16.13), together with the fact that a + p + y = 1, gives


                                                                  (16.15)

or




 Equation (16.16) expresses zo2/w1 as a function of parameters, and ag-
 glomeration of industry 1 in Home is sustainable if industry 2 does not
pay higher wages, that is, if w 25 70'.
   Readers will not be surprised to see that this is exactly the same
condition as we derived in chapters 5 and 14. But once again, the inter-
pretation of the parameters has changed, with a - y (the difference
between the diagonal input-output coefficient and the off-diagonal)
now playing the critical role.
   Why should a - y have replaced p (chapter 5) and a (chapter 14) in
an otherwise identical equation for the sustain condition? As usual,
the term outside the square brackets captures forward linkages; if an
industry 1 firm were to locate in Foreign, it would find its inputs from
industry 1 relatively more expensive and those from industry 2
cheaper, and the cost shares of these inputs are a and y, respectively.
Inside the square brackets are the backward-linkage effects, where
Home has share (1 + a - y) / 2 of world expenditure on industry 1 and
share (1 + y - a)/ 2 of expenditure on industry 2.
   The interpretation of the sustain condition is quite natural. If a - y
is negative, then linkages between industries are stronger than those
within industries. The right-hand side of (16.16)is then less than unity
for all T > 1, and concentration is never sustainable: Because firms
derive their most important locational benefits from linkages with
firms in the other industry, nations tend to develop a diversified in-
dustrial mix. Conversely, if a - y is positive, then the within-industry
linkages are stronger than those between industries. Geographic
concentration of industry is then sustainable for a low enough value
of T, in line with the discussion of earlier chapters. The range of T
within which agglomeration is sustainable is wider, the larger is a -
y, although we bound this by a - y < p = (0- 1)/o,the new version
of the no-black-hole condition.
290                                                           Chapter 16


   Turning to the break point, we want to find how a reallocation of
labor between industries changes wages in each sector. We can evalu-
ate changes around the symmetric equilibrium, at which h' = h2 = Vz.
It is easily checked that at the symmetric equilibrium,
zu = 1, E = 2/p,     G ' - @= (1 + T1-9/2.                        (16.17)
As usual we have to totally differentiate equilibrium conditions (equa-
tions (16.3)-(16.8))around this equilibrium, but as we differentiate, the
double symmetry property applies. For each variable, an increase in
industry 1 at Home is accompanied by a decrease in industry 2, and
also by a decrease in Foreign industry 1 and increase in Foreign indus-
try 2. In other words, derivatives satisfy
dh    dh1 = dh? = -dh2   1  -dh1,                                 (16.18)
and similarly for other variables.
  We want to find the total differential d w / d h ; calculations and an
explicit expression are given in appendix 16.1. We find that the set of
parameter values at which dw/dh = 0 and at which symmetry is broken
are given by

                                                                  (16.19)

This condition too is exactly analogous to that derived in chapters 5,
7, and 14, meaning that the structure of equilibria is just as we have
seen before. At high trade costs, both industries operate in both econo-
mies, but at lower trade costs, concentration becomes first possible,
then necessary. Because of the symmetry we have built in, the two
economies always have the same wages and income levels, but they
have come totally to specialize despite the absence of any differences
in technology, preferences, or endowments.
   It is extremely tempting to think of this model as suggesting the rea-
sons why the industrial geographies of the United States and Europe,
economies of similar size and technological development, look so dif-
ferent. As we pointed out, U.S. industries are typically monocentric,
concentrated in and around a Silicon Valley, Detroit, or Wall Street.
Often those same industries have three or four major centers in Europe.
The obvious explanation for the difference is that the higher de facto
trade costs posed by Europe's borders have blocked continental-scale
industrial clustering. And our model therefore suggests that the grow-
ing integration of the European market could break the symmetry of
Industrial Clustering                                                  291


Europe's multiple-industry geography, leading to a cumulative pro-
cess of concentration that produces American-style monocentricity.
  But isn't this a good thing? Should European policy makers be
concerned?

16.4 Adjustment and Real Income

We have been suggesting that a model of this type might yield insights
about the effects of economic integration among regions-perhaps
within the European Union or the North American free-trade area. So
far, however, our analysis has been all positive; what about the norma-
tive implications? That is, what does the model say about the economic
costs and benefits of reductions in trade barriers if they lead to the sort
of reorganization of economic geography demonstrated in the previous
section?
   Figure 16.1 illustrates the Home country's real wages in each indus-
try as a function of A', the share of the Home labor force in industry
1.Real wages are nominal wages deflated by the consumer price index;
that is,2


The figure illustrates only the Home economy but is constructed with
international symmetry, so h' =       x2,
                                    and so on. The solid lines depict




1.04


1.02

   a'
I .O



                                                      1.o
        0.0
              A'   A
                                0.5
                                            .-   a2


Figure 16.1
Sectoral employment and wages
292                                                              Chapter 16


real wages in industry 1, and the dashed, real wages in industry 2. The
curves are drawn for two values of trade costs. The lower pair of curves
(the two that intersect at points ci2, d, and a ' ) have trade costs set at
exactly the level at which agglomeration becomes sustainable ( T ( S ) =
1.8).The upper pair (in bold, intersecting at D) have lower trade costs,
set at the level at which the symmetric equilibrium becomes unstable
( T ( B ) = 1.625).
   Looking first at the lower pair of curves, the equilibrium at d is stable
(because an increase in h' implies w' < w2). Points a' and a2 are also
equilibria, with Home having industry 1 or 2 respectively, because
o' = w2 at these end points. (Recall that the curves are constructed for
the sustain point level of T; at higher trade costs, agglomeration is not
sustainable because U' < w2 at h' = 1, and at lower trade costs w' >
w2 at h' = 1.)The point to note from these curves is that agglomeration,
were it to occur, would bring a real income gain: Points ci' and a* are
above point d. Agglomeration means that more trade costs are incurred
in shipping final products to consumers, this tending to lower welfare.
But trade costs are saved on intermediate products as firms benefit
from agglomeration. If agglomeration is sustainable, the latter effect
dominates, and the net effect is the real income gain illustrated, (Ap-
pendix 16.2 gives expressions for welfare in the two cases and estab-
lishes that agglomeration yields higher real income than diversification
for small values of T.)
   As trade costs fall, the real wage curves of figure 16.1 shift upward
and rotate. For trade costs between the sustain and break values, there
are five equilibria (edge points, the symmetric equilibrium lying be-
tween d and D, and two unstable equilibria flanking the symmetric
equilibrium). At the break point, the intersection of the real-wage
curves at D changes direction, as illustrated by the tangency of w' to
w? at point D.
   If trade costs fall steadily, then the economy tracks up from d to D.
When D is reached, diversification becomes unstable, and agglomera-
tion occurs. Let us suppose that Home attracts industry 1. h' therefore
starts to rise, and as this happens workers in industry 1 get steadily
better off: Their wages move along from D to A', as illustrated by
the arrow on the w' curve. What about workers in industry 2? Their
real wages follow the path illustrated by the arrow on the w2 curve
in the figure. They suffer declining real income-although the num-
ber of workers in this category is of course falling to 0 as h' increases
to unity.
Industrial Clustering                                                   293


   The message therefore is clear. If falling trade costs bring agglomera-
tion, then the aggregate gain from the reduction in these costs is ampli-
fied: Real-income gains flow from clustering of industries. However,
there are adjustment costs on the way. In our simple model, half the
labor force has to change jobs, and these workers suffer a real-income
loss in the process. Of course, the magnitude of the real-income loss
depends on the speed at which adjustment occurs, and also on other
labor market imperfections that we have not tried to describe.

16.5 Multiple Factors: Industrial Clustering in a Heckscher-Ohlin
World

Up to this point we have worked with a model that has only a single
factor of production-in effect a sort of Ricardian model of interna-
tional trade, even if the source of specialization is linkage-driven ag-
glomeration rather than exogenous comparative advantage. Trade
theorists have long known, however, that models with multiple factors
of production typically soften the extreme specialization results of Ri-
cardian models. Is the same true here? More generally, what happens
to the model's results when we move to a framework with two or more
factors of production?
   To answer these questions while preserving as much of the model's
basic simplicity as we can, we adopt a device introduced to trade the-
ory by Kenen (1965).We now think of the "primary" inputs used in the
production of each good not as factors of production, but themselves as
produced from more basic factors. That is, we now suppose that h' and
h2are "produced" from primary factors such as labor and capital, and
that they differ in their factor intensities, so that the economy has a
strictly concave production possibility frontier (PPF) for the creation
of these inputs. Figure 16.2 illustrates such a frontier; it is identical to
the PPF between quantities of output that obtains in a standard two-
good competitive model, such as Heckscher-Ohlin. Because factor
markets are perfectly competitive and firms are cost minimizing, its
construction is the same as that for a PPF on final output space. As
usual, the gradient of the PPF gives the marginal rate of transforma-
tion between the quantities h' and h2, and with competitive factor
markets this is equal to their price ratio. Thus, the gradient of the PPF
at a given point measures the relative prices of h' and h2 at that point,
and we call this price ratio v2/v'. These prices are constructed from
the prices of the underlying primary factors in the economy, but for
294                                                            Chapter 16




                                       A2
                                                   h2
Figure 16.2
Production possibility frontier with two factors


our immediate purposes, we do not need to go back to these factor
prices.
   Rather than working with a completely general PPF, we maintain
the assumption (surprise!) that the two industries are symmetric, giv-
ing rise to a PPF that is symmetric around the 45” line. In a Heckscher-
Ohlin framework, this means that if units are chosen such that the
economy is equally endowed with capital and labor, then at all factor
prices, the capital-labor ratio in industry 1 is the reciprocal of the
capital-labor ratio in industry 2. We also scale units such that endpoints
of the PPF are at h’ = 0, h2 = 1, and h‘ = 1, h2 = 0.
   With this reinterpretation of h’ and h2 we can easily see how our
analysis of agglomeration carries over to economies with concave PPFs.
Suppose that the equilibrium involves agglomeration of industry 1 in
Home and industry 2 in Foreign, so we are at point A’ on figure 16.2
with h’ = 1, h2 = 0. From section 16.3, we know that the prices Home
firms are offering for inputs h2and h’ are, in ratio form, 7u2/7u’, given
by equation (16.16):




However, the equilibrium price ratio for these inputs is v2/v’, given
by the slope of the PPF at point A ’ . The agglomeration is therefore
Industrial Clustering                                                    295




   1.o




   0.9



         4  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
         1.0      1.2      1.4     1.6     1.8              T

Figure 16.3
Sustain points


sustainable if w 2 / w ' 5 v2/v'; f this nequality holds it is not profitable
for factors to move into industry 2.
   This is illustrated in figure 16.3,where the curve is the relationship
between zu2/ 2.0' and T and has a familiar shape (see, for example, figure
5.5). With a single factor of production, the PPF is a straight line with
gradient -1, so the sustain condition is exactly as described in section
16.3; it is illustrated on the figure as point t(s). However, the strictly
concave PPF means that at point A', we have v*/v' < 1, so that ag-
glomeration becomes more difficult to sustain. The horizontal solid
line in figure 16.3 is drawn at height v 2/ v 1 and consequently gives
two sustain points, T(S). We see that, provided the gradient v 2 / v '
is not too low, there is an interval of trade costs at which agglomer-
ation is sustainable, but agglomeration is unsustainable both at low
and at high values of T. The intuition is straightforward. If only one
industry is active in the economy, then the factor intensive in this
industry is expensive, and the factor intensive in the other industry
is cheap (this showing up in v2/v1 < 1). These factor price differ-
ences make entry by a firm in the other industry relatively attractive.
In particular, such factor price differences are unsustainable at
perfectly free trade-where factor price equalization will certainly
hold-so that agglomeration is impossible at (and in the neighborhood
of) T = 1.
296                                                               Chapter 16


dw/dA




       0.1




       0.0



             L .O   1.2        1.4        1.6         1.8     T
Figure 16.4
Break points


  What about the break point? The diversified equilibrium becomes
unstable where an increase in h’ enables industry 1 to pay more for its
inputs than their going price. At the symmetric equilibrium (point D
on figure 16.2) we have

-zu2
   _-- v2 = 1.                                                       (16.22)
117’     v’
Writing (as usual) d h = dh’ = --dh2,d w = dw’ = -dw2, and d v = dv’ =
-dv2, the symmetric equilibrium is unstable if
dzo dv
- > -.                                                               (16.23)
dh dh
The expression for d w / d h is exactly as outlined in section 16.3 and
given in the appendix; it is illustrated in figure 16.4. With the straight-
line PPF of section 16.2,the right-hand side of (16.23)is 0 and the critical
point is as before-equation (16.19)-and illustrated at point t(b) of
figure 16.4. Curvature of the PPF means that d v / d h is positive, so pro-
viding that the curvature is not too great, there are two break points,
T(B).Intuitively, the factor price changes associated with changing the
sizes of the two industrial sectors are stabilizing forces that offset-
but do not necessarily overturn-the destabilizing forces forward and
backward linkages create.
Industrial Clustering                                                 297


A', A2
         1.o




         0.5




         0.0



Figure 16.5
Bifurcation with two factors


   Figure 16.5, which gives the allocation of labor between industries
as a function of trade costs, shows the full bifurcation picture. We see
that at high and at low trade costs, each country employs half its labor
force in each industry: at high trade costs because of the need to serve
final consumers, and at low trade costs because of factor supply consider-
ations. In between there is a range in which agglomeration is sustainable,
and a narrower range in which the diversified equilibrium is unstable.
   All of this should look familiar from chapters 7 and 14. In both of
those chapters we found that when centrifugal forces besides transport
costs were at work on manufactured goods, the relationship between
those transport costs and agglomeration tended to be an inverted U :
no agglomeration at high transport costs, the emergence of a core-
periphery pattern at intermediate costs (where being close to the final
consumer had become less important but linkages were still powerful),
and finally a reversion to dispersed manufacturing to take advantage
of low wages or food costs at low transport costs. We suggested that
this might be a fairly general pattern, and indeed we see it here again.
  How does the configuration illustrated in figure 16.5 depend on the
production functions for primary factor usage in the two industries?
Figures 16.3-16.5 were constructed for a two-factor Heckscher-Ohlin-
type model, in which the two industries have Cobb-Douglas technol-
ogies with different factor intensities, details of which are given in
298                                                            Chapter 16


appendix 16.2. Making the factor intensities of the two industries more
different has the effect of narrowing the range in which agglomeration
occurs (pushing ( v 2 / v ' )downward in figure 16.3, and d v / d h upward
in figure 16.4).
   Cobb-Douglas technologies generate (in all the examples we com-
puted) the double tomahawk configuration illustrated in figure 16.5.
It is easy to see that other functional forms generate different configu-
rations. For example, fixed-coefficient technologies imply a PPF that
has two straight segments and a kink at the symmetric equilibrium.
With such a technology, the symmetric equilibrium never becomes un-
stable, but agglomeration may be sustainable. (The bifurcation diagram
is like that in figure 7.3.) At the other extreme, consider a PPF that is
linear (with gradient - 1)in the neighborhood of the symmetric equilib-
rium but has strictly concave segments close to the axes. For some pa-
rameters, such a technology may cause the symmetric equilibrium to
be unstable, but agglomeration (with full specialization) to be unsus-
tainable. We then have a standard pitchfork rather than a tomahawk
configuration, with asymmetric interior equilibria, as we saw in chap-
ter 14 (figure 14.8).Once again, whether the equilibrium configuration
is pitchfork or tomahawk depends not on our modeling of behaviour
in manufacturing, but instead on the curvature of the technology be-
tween the industries.
   Finally, it is worth drawing out the implications of this analysis for
the prices of the underlying factors of production. The model generates
the possibility that trade liberalization may, over some range, have the
effect of disequalizing factor prices. Factor price equalization obtains
at very low trade costs and, because the economies are by construction
identical, also at very high trade costs. But if a reduction in trade costs
brings about agglomeration, say to point A' in figure 16.2, then it raises
the price of h' relative to h' in the Home economy, with the converse
effect in the Foreign economy. Any differences in these prices cause
magnified differences in the prices of the underlying factors as Stolper-
Samuelson effects come into play.

16.6 Multiple Industries and Sustainable Cross-Country
Differences

We now return to the assumption of a single primary factor but allow
for the existence of many (more than 2) industries. When agglomera-
tion occurs, how many industries-what proportion of the total num-
Industrial Clustering                                                             299


ber-are located in each country? With just two industries, the answer
is one industry in each country, implying (given the symmetry between
industries) that the two countries have the same wages and income
levels. But in a many-industry model, the division need not be half and
half. One economy may have more industries than the other, and if it
does, it will also have higher real wages.3 As we shall see, there is a
range within which the actual division of industries among countries
is indeterminate, and within this range there may be incentives for
countries to try to attract as many industries as possible. Our first task
in this section is to characterize this range of indeterminacy, and we
can do this in the familiar way, by establishing what patterns of ag-
glomeration are sustainable.
   Analysis is based on modification of the model of section 16.2 to
accomodate many industries. We assume that all industries are sym-
metric and let the number of industries be H . We also set the off-
diagonal elements of the input-output matrix, y, equal to 0, so that there
are only intra-industry linkages, a > 0, and a + p = 1. This assumption
is not necessary for the results but greatly simplifies the expressions
that follow. With these assumptions, the price set by a Home firm in
industry i is, for each i = 1 . . . H ,
p' = (zu')P(G')~.                                                              (16.24)
We can restate the price indices and wage equations (from equations
(16.3-16.4), and (16.5-16.6)) as
G = [hi(zuI ) 1 -PO( G ) -ao + X I( z I~ ~
  I                       I                 ) I ) - aa T 1 -01 1 / ( 1 - a),
                                        -pa(C                                  (16.25)
and
           = P[E'(G')"-' + E 1 ( G f ) a - lT1-9,
[(Tu')P(G')~]"                                                                 (16.26)
for each i = 1 . . . H. Expenditure on each industry comes from equa-
tions (16.7) and (16.8) and takes the form

                                                                               (16.27)

where consumers spend a fraction 1/ H of their income on each indus-
try's output, and the summation gives the total wage bill in the home
economy.
   We focus on the sustainability of an equilibrium in which each in-
dustry is agglomerated in one country. As usual, then, we assume a
300                                                             Chapter 16


division of industries between countries and check to see whether it
is sustainable. Suppose that industries are partitioned into sets I and
11, located in Home and Foreign, respectively. The number of industries
in set I is denoted h, and the number in set 11, h, so h + h = H. We use
superscripts I and I1 to denote variables for industries in each set, so,
for example, h' is Home country employment in one industry in set I.
Each economy fully employs its endowment of one unit of labor in its
set of industries, so the partition implies that
h' = 1/11, h" = 0,
                                                                    (16.28)
XI = 0, XI' = l/h".
The first row says that the Home country has no employment in in-
dustries in set I1 and that its total labor force (of unity) is equally
divided between the 12 industries in set I. The second line gives the
corresponding employment levels in Foreign. Notice that if 11 > k then
h' < XI'. Thus, if Home has more than half of world industry, then
employment in each of the Home industries is less than in each of
Foreign's.
   Conditional on this distribution of industries, what does the equilib-
rium look like? First, it is easy to derive relative wages in the industries
active in each country, iu'/.CU". Each industry takes the same share of
world income and has the same share of wages in costs, implying that
the wage bill is the same in all industries. But as we have seen, employ-
ment levels depend on the distribution of industries (equation (16.28)),
so wages vary inversely, meaning that
717'/7%''   = h/G.                                                  (16.29)
Thus, if Home has twice as many industries as Foreign, then it has
twice the wage; high wages match low per industry employment levels
to give an equal value of output in all industries.
  These relationships allow some simplification of the expressions for
manufacturing expenditure, (16.27), which become,




                                                                    (16.30)
Industrial Clustering                                                   301


We also need expressions for the price indices. Because each industry
operates in just one country, the price index equations (16.25) become,

                                                                    (16.31)


   We can now test for sustainability of our assumed division of indus-
try. To do this, we have to compare wages in industries operating with
the wages that could be paid by a firm entering another industry. For
the Home economy, we must therefore compare wages paid by indus-
tries in set I with those that would be paid by a potential entrant from
a set I1 industry. From (16.26),the ratio of the wage equations for indus-
tries in set I and in set I1 is


                                                                    (16.32)

Using equations (16.28)-(16.31), we can reduce this to


                                                                   (16.33)

If this expression is less than unity, then w" < zu', so workers in set I
industries do not want to move into industries in set 11.
   This condition has a structure similar to other sustain conditions,
and when h = 6 = H / 2 , it collapses back to the simple sustain condition
of section 16.2 (equation (16.16)).The shape of this relationship is illus-
trated by the solid curve on figure 16.6, which has transport costs on
the horizontal axis and, country 1's share of world industry on the
vertical axis, and maps out values of these variables at which equation
(16.33) is unity. At values of h / H above the line, no firm from a set I1
industry wants to enter the Home economy (w"< zu'), whereas below
the solid line, h / H is unsustainable (w"> zu').
   The curve derives its shape from the following forces. The first term
on the right-hand side of (16.33), T-*, captures forward linkages,
as usual; a potential deviant has to import all its intermediates from
Foreign suppliers and pay transport costs on so doing. The final term
(in square brackets) captures backward linkages and is increasing in
h; having more industries raises income and enlarges the market, mak-
ing it more attractive for firms from industries in set I1 to become
302                                                               Chapter 16




       . - . - . -       I   -   . - . - .-.-   7   -7    -   -



       1.0             1.3              1.6         1.9       T
Figure 16.6
Set of sustainable equilibria


established in the Home country. But the middle term ( h / h ) reflects
relative wages in the two locations (see equation (16.29))and is decreas-
ing in h; a larger number of industries in Home raises wages, making
entry of further industries less attractive. Combining these effects, the
right-hand side as a whole is decreasing in h, so the higher is h, the less
likely it is that a further industry becomes established in Home.
   For the equilibrium to be sustainable, we have to establish both that
entry of industry I1 firms in Home is not profitable, and that entry of
industry I firms in Foreign is unprofitable. A second sustain equa-
tion must therefore be derived for Foreign; it is like (16.33) but gives
         and has h and h interchanged. It is illustrated by the dashed
zl~'/zl?'[
line on figure 16.6, above which Foreign wages are sufficiently low that
entry by an industry I firm is profitable (zZ1/zZ1* > 1).
   Putting the curves together, any division of industry between coun-
tries is sustainable as long at it lies in the area between these curves
and to the left of their intersection. The T value at which the curves
intersect is just the usual sustain point, as can be seen by giving each
country half of the world industries and comparing equation (16.33)
with the sustain equation of section 16.2 (equation (16.16)).At transport
costs above this point, no agglomeration at all is possible. At the other
end, when T = 1, factor prices must be equalized, and this forces the
number of industries in each country to be the same. As usual, then,
the scope for agglomeration is greatest at intermediate values of trade
Industrial Clustering                                                   303


costs, and the width of the range of equilibria that can be sustained is
also largest there.
   At a given level of transport costs, the width of the range of sustain-
able allocations of industries, and hence of international wage
differences, is larger the stronger are the intra-industry linkages,
a.Figure 16.6 was computed with a = 0.4. Increasing a widens the
sustainable range considerably: With a = 0.67, one economy may
have three times as many industries as the other. Generalizing the
model to have positive interindustry linkages (y > 0), it can be
shown that for agglomeration to be sustainable, a - y must be
greater than 0, and the range of sustainable allocations is wider, the
larger is a - y.
   Although the model says nothing about what determines the actual
division of industries among countries, there is clearly a potential con-
flict of interest among countries, insofar as each may want to attract a
disproportionate share of the set of industries. By doing so, a country
raises its nominal wage and reduces the proportion of its consumption
on which it has to bear transport costs. But two forces are pulling in
the other direction. One is that the number of varieties produced by
each industry in the Home country falls as more industries are packed
in; the other is that as Foreign economy shrinks, so the volume of trade
falls and the gains from trade are lost. Putting this differently, the terms
of trade start to deteriorate as the level of Foreign demand for Home
output falls.
   What is the net effect of attracting industries on real income? We have
derived an explicit expression for real income as a function of the division
of industries among countries, but the expression is far from transparent,
and we relegate it to appendix 16.4. However, simulation indicates that
within the range of sustainable equilibria, each country’s real income is
strictly increasing in its share of manufacturing industry. That is, al-
though in principle it may not be in a country’s interest to push a policy
of ”industry grabbing” too far, our simulations suggest that, within the
relevant range, there are gains to grabbing as many as you can.

16.7 Conclusions

The models examined in this chapter have, we believe, illustrated both
the flexibility and the surprising generality of the approach taken in
this book. The original core-periphery model introduced in chapter 5
may have seemed rather specific in its focus: It was about regional
304                                                            Chapter 16


agglomeration within a country, and about agriculture versus manu-
facturing as an aggregate. Now we have seen not only that very similar
models can be applied to cities and nations as well as regions, but also
that many of the same insights carry over with suitable reinterpreta-
tion to issues involving the geographical concentration of particular
industries, and provide an explanation of the observed clustering of
industries.
   The issues raised in this chapter have interesting policy dimensions.
Although the model says nothing about what determines the actual
division of industries among countries, the location of a particular in-
dustry clearly may be subject to hysteresis. Suppose that one economy
experiences a temporary adverse shock, causing it to lose industries to
the other country; there is then no mechanism for the return of these
industries once the shock is reversed. And as we have seen, conflicts
of interest can arise among nations even when all industries are as-
sumed to be symmetrical, and these conflicts are likely to be exacer-
bated if some industries are regarded as strategic, with relatively strong
links to other sectors.

Appendix 16.1: Symmetry Breaking

Sustainability
The equilibrium values of variables in the equilibrium with agglomera-
               I




tion are h' = h' = 1, h' = h' = 0 (equation 16.9) and zu' = zi3* = 1.
                             I




Price indices and expenditure levels are


                                                                  (16A.1)




Stability Analysis
At the symmetric equilibrium, we have h =         and
z u = 1, E = 2/p,    G ' - @ = (1 + T1-")/2.                      (16A.2)
Defining Z ,

                                                                  (16A.3)
Industrial Clustering                                              305


and totally differentiating the price indices gives
                       dG    dh
[l - CJ + o(a - y ) Z ] - = Z- + (1 - po)ZdzLT.                (16A.4)
                        G    h
From the wage equations,
         dE                        dG
@dzo = Z- + [((T - 1)Z - o(a - y)]-,                           (16A.5)
          E                         G
and from expenditure,

dE
--
 E
   - (a - y)    (": +   dw].                                   (16A.6)

Eliminating dE, the system becomes

 op - Z(a - y) (a - y)0 + (1 - 0)Z
 (0P - 1)Z          1 - 0 + ( a - y)oZ

                Z(a - y ) d h / h
                                           I                   (16A.7)



from which
dzo      Z
                                    Z(o(1 + (a - yy) - l)]
  -
~-      --[(a   - y)(20 - 1) -
dh        LA
                                                               (16A.8)
                                                   I

                               1-P
where
A = 0(1 - o)P + Z(a - y)(20 - 1)
                                                               (16A.9)
      - z2[o(a- y)2 - (0- l)(p0 - l)],
which is negative if (0- l ) / o = P > a - y.

Appendix 16.2: Adjustment and Real Income



                                                             (16A. 10)
Using values of the price indices and wages, real income at the sym-
metric and agglomerated equilibria are, respectively, co(d ) and w(a):
306                                                                  Chapter 16



                                                                       (16A.11)

These are equal at 7'= 1. Differentiating with respect to T in the neigh-
borhood of T = 1 establishes that if a > y, then o ( a ) > o(s) for some
interval of T > 1.

Appendix 16.3: The Production Possibility Frontier

Let the endowments of the primary factors be denoted kl, k2 with
prices r l , r2. Industry technologies are defined by cost functions for
the composite primary inputs:
v1 = rlhr21-6, v2 = rll "28                                            (16A.12)
If 6 = l h , the two sectors have the same technology, and the further is
6 from *h,the more different are the sectors. Factor market clearing can
be expressed in value terms as
r l k l = 6v'hI + (1 - 6)v2h2,
                                                                       (16A.13)
r2k2 = (1 - 6)v'h' + 6v2h2.
Defining relative factor prices, R = r l / r 2 , and using (16A.12) in
(16A.13), we can derive
Rkl = 6R"'         + (1 - 6)R' 'h',
                                                                       (16A.14)
 k2 = (1 - 6)R'k' + 6R'-'h2.
These two equations implicitly define the PPF (obtained by eliminating
R ) . We set endowments at
k l = k2 = 6'(1 - 6)' '.                                               (16A.15)
The gradient of the PPF is Z I * / Z ? ' = R' 26. If h' = 1, then R = 6 / ( l -
6) , and V ' / Z J ' = (6/(1 - 6))' ". At the symmetric equilibrium, h = k l ,
R = 1, and hdz,/iih = (26 - 1)?/(46(1- 6)).

Appendix 16.4: Multiple Industries

Real income in Home is ~ U ~ [ ( G ' ) ' ~ ( G ''I .' ) 'We
                                                          ] can use Home labor as
numeraire, so   = 1. From (16.31) with (16.28)and (16.29),

G' = 11' Cpo 1 )    G11 = Th'   (PO   l)h//i,                          ( 16A.16)
Industrial Clustering                                                                307


from which an explicit expression for real income as a function of the
allocation of industries, h, ifcan be derived.

Appendix 16.5: Simulation Parameters

Figure 16.1: CJ = 5, a = 0.4, p = 0.6, y = 0, T = 1.8 and T = 1.625.
Figure 16.2: Not drawn from simulation.
Figures 16.3-16.5: CJ = 5, a = 0.4, p = 0.6, y = 0, 6 = 0.4.
Figure 16.6: CJ = 5, a = 0.4, p = 0.6, H = 100.

Notes

1. Ifs: denotes the share of statej in employment in industry i, Krugman computed, for
each industry i, the Gini coefficient across states j of the variable s ~ / X f s ~ .
2. Because labor is mobile only within countries, analysis of the structure of equilibria
can use either zu' or a'.In section 16.3 it was simplest to use 741'. Now we want to draw
out real income implications, so we use d.
3. This analysis is somewhat similar in spirit to Baumol and Gomory 1987.
This page intentionally left blank
17                                   A Seamless World




International economics has traditionally focused, for good reasons, on
trade flows as they cross national boundaries. Boundaries are the
points at which data is collected, and national boundaries seem to mat-
ter a great deal for trade flows, even when formal trade barriers are
low. Nonetheless, one might think of a general theory of trade as ex-
plaining trade flows across a geographical space, not just those flows
that happen to cross arbitrary lines called borders. In this chapter we
construct a model of specialization and trade in a "seamless" world,
one in which national boundaries are ignored, and even economic re-
gions-which are typically fuzzy edged areas rather than points-are
observed rather than defined ex ante.
   It would be straightforward to construct a comparative advantage-
based model of trade in a seamless world, although we are not aware
of any studies that do so. Imagine, for example, a Ricardian model in
which a continuum of locations is arrayed in a line from north to south
and climate and therefore the relative productivity of labor in wine as
opposed to wheat production varies smoothly with latitude. Then one
would immediately have a model in which equilibrium in the world
economy could be thought of in terms of the boundary between wheat
and wine areas rather than in terms of the specialization of nations. It
would be natural to think of this world as consisting of two regions,
one producing wheat and the other producing wine, but the boundary
between these regions would be endogenous rather than specified in
advance.
  For some purposes this approach to modeling a seamless world
might well prove useful; comparative advantage still explains much,
perhaps most of world trade. But rather than follow this approach, we
abstract from underlying differences in comparative advantage, as we
have throughout this book. Instead, we suppose that there are two (or
310                                                             Chapter 17


more) manufacturing industries, and ask whether these industries or-
ganize into distinct regions of specialization. The framework is that of
the preceding chapter, so linkages among firms create forces for indus-
trial clustering. In a seamless world, do these forces lead to the forma-
tion of specialized economic regions, and if so, how large are these
regions, and how many of them form? We developed the tools for an-
swering these questions in chapter 6: the Turing analysis of emergent
structure.
   We will see that a regular structure of specialization emerges, involv-
ing the formation of regions specializing in each industry. We then turn
to a second set of issues. As parameters of the model change, what
happens to this structure? For example, as trade costs fall, an existing
pattern of regional specialization may become, in some sense, less ap-
propriate to the new circumstances, but the very existence of the struc-
ture creates a lock-in effect: Firms are unwilling to move away from
an existing region of specialization because of the linkages that they
would forego. There is therefore a tension between the circular causa-
tion that sustains an existing structure and the pressure for change fall-
ing transport costs create. How is this tension resolved? The answer is
that geographical change is characterized by ”punctuated equilib-
rium.’” A structure of regional specialization, once established, per-
sists for some time even as the economy’s parameters change, but
eventually a critical point is passed, and a bifurcation occurs: The
structure becomes unsustainable and another economic geography
develops.
   Finally, with an eye (as in chapter 16) to the effects of European inte-
gration, we abandon our assumption of symmetry of locations and in-
dustries to consider a geometry that makes an inherent distinction
between central and peripheral regions. We show that for any given
level of trade costs, there is a characteristic distribution of industry
between center and periphery, but that this distribution can change,
and even reverse, as transport costs fall.

17.1 The Model

We begin with a version of the racetrack economy of chapter 6. That
is, locations are spread around the circumference of a circle of radius
D, and are labeled r, s E [0, 2nD].
   The industrial structure is the same as that of the previous chapter:
There is no agricultural sector, but instead two monopolistically com-
A Seamless World                                                              31 1


petitive industries, with firms linked through the production and use
of intermediate goods. We continue to assume, as we did at the end
of that chapter, that each firm uses as intermediates only products from
its own industry-that the input-output matrix has nonzero elements
only on the main diagonal-although this assumption would be fairly
easy to relax. We also return to the production structure of section 16.5,
in which inputs are generated from primary factors along a concave
production possibility frontier for input into each industry. For com-
putational convenience, however, we derive the PPF not from a
Heckscher-Ohlin-type two-factor model, but from a Cobb-Douglas ver-
sion of the Ricardo-Viner model (as in Jones 1971; Samuelson 1971), in
which a mobile factor must be allocated between employment in two
industries, each with its own specific factor.
   Let us then denote the price of the industry i-specific factor at loca-
tion Y as y'(v), its share in costs K, and each location's endowment as
k'. The prices charged by location r firms in industry i therefore take
the form
p ' ( r ) = [ ~ ' ( r ) ] ~ [ G ' ( r ) ] " [ y ' ( ~ i) ]=~ ,1, 2,        (17.1)
where p is the share of labor, a is the share of intermediates from the
same industry, K is the share of the industry-specific factor, and a +
p + K = 1. These parameters are the same for both industries: As in
the previous chapter, the industries are symmetrical.
     Factors are geographically immobile, and their prices adjust to se-
cure their full employment at each location. With Cobb-Douglas tech-
nologies, it is easy to find an expression for the prices of the specific
factors. If the wage bill in industry i at location Y is ZU'(Y) h'(v),then
the equilibrium value of specific factor inputs, y'(r)k', satisfies
y ' ( v ) k' = zu'(r) ~ ' ( Y ) K / P .We choose units of measurement for the spe-
cific factors such that endowment levels are k' = K / p, i = 1,2, meaning
that the price of the specific factor is y(r)' = zu(r)' h(v)'.Using this in
equation (17.1), we can restate the prices charged by location Y firms
in each industry as,
p' (r ) = [ZU' ( r )]Pt [G ' ( r )]a [h' ( v )IK,                          (17.2)
p 2 (r ) = [zo2( v ) ] P ' "[G2(r)la[L2(r )]".                             (17.3)
The effect of the specific factor is apparent. If K > 0, then expanding
an industry (i.e., increasing h'(r)) encounters diminishing returns,
pushing up costs and prices. We shall see, as in some previous
312                                                                                             Chapter 17


chapters, that this factor supply effect enters as a centrifugal force,
working against agglomeration of industry.
  We can now write down the model's equations. Each location is en-
dowed with one unit of labor, so h'(r) + h2(r)= 1. The price indices
for each industry's products in each location take the form
                    nV
[G'(r)]'-"=               [zu1 (s)]1 U(P+K) [G1 (s)]-aIJ [A' ( s ) ]1 -Koe-r(IJ 1 )I' $IQ! s,       (17.4)
                  J -KV

                    nD

[G2(r)l' IJ =             [zu2(s>l'                                                                 (17.5)

The wage equations are

( [ z ~ ' ( r ) ] P + ~ [ G l ( r ) ] ~ [=h lP(Jr ) ] ~ ) ~
                                                      [G'(s>]IJ-'E1(s)e                   %Is,      (17.6)



                                                 r:
                                                                     l(IJ
                                                  -   nD



([zv'(r)]P'"[ G 2 ( r ) ] a [ h 2 ( r ) ]=K )pu            [G2(s)]"' E 2 ( s ) e'(T ')Ir-'kis.      (17.7)

Expenditure on each industry at location r is given by


E'(r) =    (p-:p") [W1(r)h'(r)+ 7u2(r)h*(r)]+ azu ' rP h' ( r                   ( )       )
                                                                                           1.       (17.8)


E 2 ( r ) = ( y ) [ 7 u 1 ( r ) A 1 ( r+) 7u2(r)h2(r)]+ azu (r )A' (r )
                                                                                                    (17.9)

The coefficient on the first term in the expenditure equations reflects
the fact that there is income from labor and from the specific fac-
tors; thus total income is (p + K)/P times the wage bill. The second
term is the backward linkage of intermediate demand from the same
sector.
   Finally, we assume that, whereas all factors of production are geo-
graphically immobile, labor can move between industries at a location.
This adjustment follows a dynamic of the form
h ' ( r ) = (zu*(r)- G ( r ) ) h ' ( r ) ,                                                         (17.10)
where Z(Y)is the average wage in the two sectors at location Y. The
quantity h?(r)adjusts in an equal and offsetting way to hold total em-
ployment at unity.
A Seamless World                                                       313


17.2 The Frequency of Agglomeration

What can be said about the equilibria of this model? First, there is cer-
tainly a flat earth equilibrium in which both industries have an equal
presence in all locations. At the flat earth, h = l/2, 10 = 1 (dropping
location and industry-specific notation), and we see from inspection of
the equilibrium conditions that E = 1/2p and


                                                                   (17.11)


The flat earth may or may not be stable, and to find out, we look at
eigenvalues of the differential equation (17.10). We know how to do
this from the Turing analysis of chapter 6. We are concerned only with
local stability, so we linearize and look at small deviations around the
flat earth; and we need look only at sinusoidal fluctuations, because
any sinusoidal fluctuation is an eigenfunction of the system, and any
deviation from the flat earth can be represented as a sum of sinusoidal
fluctuations.
   Expressing deviations from the flat earth by placing a prime on vari-
ables, the deviation in employment shares is
x'(r)'   = -h2(r)' = 6). cos(vY),                                  (17.12)

where v is the frequency of the deviation and 6 k measures its am-
plitude. These perturbations in hi(r)induce changes in other endo-
genous variables that are also sinusoidal and have the property that
an increase for one industry is a decrease for the other, so they must
take the form




7U1(Y)' = -7O2(Y)/   = 6,, cos(vr),                                (17.13)


The ratios & / 6 * , 6,,/6).and          give the changes in, respectively,
G'(v), zu'(r), and E ' ( r ) associated with the perturbation h'(r)and can
be found by totally differentiating the equilibrium conditions, (17.4),
(17.6), and (17.8), and using (17.12) and (17.13). In particular, we are
interested in the change in wages in each sector induced by a change
314                                                             Chapter 17


in employment, the term 6u,/6A.This is derived in appendix 17.1 and
takes the form,




where




                                                                   (17.15)




   To look at the stability of the flat earth, we have to use this informa-
tion in the differential equation for L'(r), equation (17.10).Linearizing
this and substituting from (17.12) and (17.13), it becomes

                                                                   (17.16)

so 6,,,/26*is the eigenvalue. This depends on the frequency of the per-
turbation, v; if any frequency has a positive eigenvalue, then flat earth
is unstable, and industrially specialized regions form at the frequency
with the largest eigenvalue, which we call, as in chapter 6, the preferred
frequency.
   To establish the preferred frequency, we need to look at two relation-
ships. Equation (17.15)determines Z in terms of v and t,and equation
(17.14) gives the eigenvalue, 6iLl/Z6k,in terms of Z . Let us assume for
a moment, as we did in chapter 6, that D is very large. In that case v
can be treated as a continuous variable, and Z becomes a much simpler
expression: The second term in (17.15) tends toward 1, so that we have

                                                                   ( 17.17)

The variable Z , then, can take on any value between 0 (for v extremely
large) to 1 (as approaches 0). What can we then learn from (17.14)?The
denominator of the equation is strictly positive, provided, as usual, the
no-black-hole condition is satisfied, p > a. The numerator then gives
the sign of the eigenvalue; that is,
A Seamless World                                                        315




   0.1




   0.0



  -0.1




         0.0    0.2        0.4       0.6        0.8         Z

Figure 17.1
Eigenvalues


sigl?[6,,/6h] = sign[Z(l - p ) ( a ( l + p) - Z(a’ + p))
                                                                    (17.18)
                      - K(1 -    z2)p].
    Consider first the case in which industry does not use specific factors,
so K = 0. Inspection of this expression indicates that the eigenvalue is
0 at Z = 0 and positive at small Z, so that high-frequency, short-wave-
length fluctuations certainly tend to grow over time. However, at Z =
1, the expression is negative-providing the no-black-hole condition
p > a holds. Thus the relationship between the eigenvalue and Z must
look like the upper curve in figure 17.1: At some interior level of Z ,
the rate of growth of a fluctuation is maximized; this level of Z , in turn,
corresponds to the preferred frequency, which determines the distance
between incipient regions of industrial specialization.
    We can also immediately confirm that the size of these incipient in-
dustrial regions depends on transport costs; in fact, the preferred fre-
quency is exactly proportional to z. This can be seen by looking at
(17.17)and noting that v always enters in the form v/z.
    If industry does use specific factors, K > 0, the relationship be-
tween the eigenvalue and Z shifts downward. There may then be
1.20 frequency of fluctuation with a positive eigenvalue; in that case,
the flat earth is stable, and regions of industrial concentration never
form. In the case illustrated by the lower curve in figure 17.1, however,
316                                                              Chapter 17




Figure 17.2
Unstable frequencies


fluctuations with intermediate values of Z, and hence intermediate fre-
quencies-not too high, not too low-will grow.
   Notice that in this latter case, if we consider a fluctuation of a given
frequency and imagine varying the transport cost z, we have our usual
inverted4 relationship between transport costs and agglomeration.
For ‘I: very high, Z is close to 1; for z very low, Z is close to 0. So any
given frequency fluctuation tends to grow only if z is in an intermediate
range.
   Figure 17.2 shows the relationship between the preferred frequency
and z using a numerical example (calculated, owing to the finiteness
of our computers, for a finite-sized economy) with K = 0.025, CJ = 5,
and a = 0.4. The units on the horizontal axis are the transport costs
on the longest distance in the economy, T,,,      ernu.The solid line in the
figure, (6,,/6h)*, shows the preferred frequency, which has the largest
possible eigenvalue, and the two broken lines show, for each level of
transport costs, the pair of frequencies at which the eigenvalue is 0. To
interpet the figure, pick a frequency and move horizontally across the
diagram. There are two critical values of trade costs between which
the eigenvalue is positive, so agglomeration occurs, similar to what we
saw in section 5 of chapter 16. As we would expect, at low trade costs,
factor supply acts against agglomeration; at high trade costs, the need
to supply immobile consumers acts against agglomeration; and at in-
A Seamless World                                                      317


termediate values, the benefits of agglomeration-at      the selected fre-
quency- dominate.*

17.3 From Local to Global

As usual, our analytical results are based on behavior in the immediate
vicinity of the flat earth, but simulation confirms that the locally pre-
ferred frequencies do in fact come to determine the long-run equilib-
rium. The full evolution of the equilibrium is given in figure 17.3, which
has employment in industry 1 on the vertical axis, locations on the
front horizontal axis, and model time running back into the diagram.
It is computed with the same parameter values as figure 17.2, and with
T,,, = 4, so from figure 17.2 we can see that the preferred frequency is
2. The initial position is one in which there are only very small random
deviations from the flat earth (giving the apparently flat front edge of
the surface). Over time regions of economic specialization emerge, and
a remarkably smooth and evenly spaced structure develops. There are
two peaks of industry 1 activity, and the industry 1 troughs are of
course peaks of industry 2 activity.
    It is worth looking at the characteristics of the long-run equilibrium
in greater detail. Long-run values of endogenous variables are illus-
trated in figure 17.4, which has locations on the horizontal axis. The
higher amplitude curves give the division of the labor force between




Figure 17.3
The evolution of manufacturing
318                                                                    Chapter 17


Wages                                                           1 .O
                                                                A=
   1.02

                                                                I
   1 .o                                                         0.5




   0.98
                                                                1
                                                                a1

                                                                0.0
                                                    locations
Figure 17.4
Equilibrium employment and wages


the two industries, with h' measured on the right-hand scale, and
h2 = 1 - h'. Clearly there are two equally spaced regions specializing
in industry 1 and two specializing in industry 2. Because of the pres-
ence of the specific factors, no location fully specializes, and if the spe-
cific factor is made more important (K is increased) then the amplitude
of the curve is decreased (assuming it is not set so large as to prevent
agglomeration from developing at all). Conversely, as K -+ 0, the
regions become increasingly specialized, and the h' curve in figure
17.4 tends toward a step function, demarcating regions of total
specialization.
   The smaller-amplitude curves mark out nominal and real wages in
each location. The nominal wage curve, zu/W, gives the wage relative
to its average value in the economy as a whole, and we see that this has
frequency 4. The wage is highest at the most specialized locations-be
it specialization in industry 1 or industry 2-and lower in the interme-
diate mixed regions; this simply reflects the benefits to producing in
the center of a specialized region. The real wage line, a/%, 03 =
Z U ( G ' G ~ ) - 'isJ ' ~
                       rather more curious. It contains four equal global min-
ima. These are in the intermediate regions, as we saw for the nominal
wage. However, in the most specialized regions, real wages attain local
minima. The reason is that the other industry's price index is quite high
A Seamless World                                                       319


in these regions, depressing real wages. The net effect is to produce
eight regions of maximum real wages, on the shoulders of regions of
specialization. Workers here benefit both from high manufacturing
wages and from relatively low cost-of-living indices.

17.4 Punctuated Equilibrium

Up to this point we have examined a hypothetical history in which a
flat earth organizes itself into different manufacturing regions. Real
history, however, is as Henry Ford described it: one damn thing after
another. We cannot hope to capture the richness of that succession, but
we can at least try to get some insight into how changes in underlying
parameters alter the pattern of trade and specialization in a world al-
ready differentiated into industrial regions. In particular, what hap-
pens to the pattern of specialization as the world economy becomes
increasingly well integrated over time?
   We address this question by carrying out the following experiment.
We reduce transportation costs in a series of small steps, and following
each step allow the model economy to evolve until it reaches a steady
state; then take the next step. Anyone who has read earlier chapters in
this book can guess what happens in such an experiment. As transport
costs fall-in effect, as the world gets smaller-the model eventually
reaches a bifurcation point, at which the equilibrium structure of man-
ufacturing regions changes. At that point the structure unravels, giving
rise to a new structure with fewer (and therefore larger) manufacturing
regions. As we continue to reduce transport costs, this new structure
persists for a time; then it in turn collapses, and so on.
   Figure 17.5 summarizes the results of such an experiment (con-
structed with the same parameter values as figures 17.3-17.4). The
solid lines give the "preferred" frequencies that are reached starting
from the flat earth equilibrium. The dashed lines and downward-point-
ing arrows show the effects of starting with high transport costs and
multiple industrial regions and progressively reducing transport costs.
   Suppose, then, that initially transport costs are high enough for a
five-region structure (i.e., five industry 1 regions, and five industry 2
regions) to exist. As transport costs fall, this regional structure remains
in place, until a critical point is reached (T,,, of around 9.5) at which
the five-region structure collapses into a three-region structure. This
then collapses into a two-region structure and then into a world with
each industry occupying a single region. Notice that in this fictitious
320                                                               Chapter 17




 5'

                        r - - - - - - -1- I - - - -
4'
                        I                I
                        I                I

3'

2

 1


0 1        3        5       7        9        11      13   Tmax


Figure 17.5
Punctuated equilibria


history, the four-region structure is leapfrogged, although if a four-
region structure existed, it too would collapse down to three regions
as transport costs fall (a transition that is also illustrated on the figure).
We find, then, that even if the change in underlying parameters is grad-
ual, the evolution of the world's spatial structure is characterized by
"punctuated equilibrium." Long stretches of stability are interrupted
by episodes of discontinuous change.
   We should also note that the equilibria that the model "visits" as
we reduce transport costs do not coincide with the equilibria attained
starting from a flat earth, so there is a path dependence in the structure
of equilibria. This is emphasized further if we run history backwards:
Start with the one-manufacturing-region equilibrium and gradually in-
crease T,,,, an evolution illustrated by the dashed lines and upward
pointing arrows in figure 17.5. The model retraces its steps, from one
to two and then to three industry 1 regions, but transitions do not
occur at the same levels of transport costs. Clearly these ranges are
overlapping. We see, then, that this model exhibits a considerable
degree of path dependence. Even in the story of self-organization
from a near-uniform world, which locations have which industries
depends on details of the initial conditions. But beyond this, as the
economy evolves over time, even gross features of the spatial struc-
ture of production may depend on where the economy has come
from.
A Seamless World                                                      321


   Figure 17.5 does not reveal where new concentrations of each indus-
try are sited. However, our simulations indicate that one of the concen-
trations of industry 1 activity is always based on an old concentration.
The overall pattern of concentrations is evenly spaced, with other con-
centrations fitting on or between earlier ones.
   Finally, we have seen in earlier chapters that bifurcations occur in
our models for two distinct reasons. An equilibrium may become un-
stable or may simply cease to be an equilibrium (it becomes unsustaina-
ble). Which is happening here? The answer can be found by computing
the eigenvalues of the system of differential equations at each step in
the process. Away from one of the critical points, there are no positive
eigenvalues, so the structure is stable.3As we reach a critical point, we
find that some of the eigenvalues of the system become positive, so
the structure becomes unstable. The bifurcations in the geographical
structure are therefore due to instability of an existing structure as the
critical value of transport costs is reached.

17.5 Multiple Industries

In the analysis above we worked with just two industries. What differ-
ence does it make if there are many? The Turing analysis of this case
is remarkably straightforward. Inspection of equations (17.4)-( 17.8)in-
dicates that for a particular industry-say the first-the price index
and the wage equation depend only on the level of employment, the
price index, the wage level, and the expenditure level in that industry.
The expenditure level includes total income, which depends on vari-
ables from both industries. But as we differentiate in the neighborhood
of the symmetric equilibrium, total income is unchanged (see equation
(17A.4)). This means that the Turing analysis for this model can be
performed at the level of a single industry, and that the results we
derive hold regardless of the number of industries there are. Thus a
particular set of industry parameters and transport costs implies the
same preferred frequency of agglomeration for each industry, regard-
less of the number of industries.
   In simulations we have examined, this local result also holds for the
global properties of the equilibrium. Figure 17.6 was simulated for a
three industry model in which all industry parameters are as in earlier
figures. The vertical axis registers total employment, and the curves
give the cumulative employment shares of each industry (h' the dashed
322                                                           Chapter 17



      h3

      I


A',   t
A' + h2

                                               locations
Figure 17.6
Equilibrium employment with three industries


line, h' + h2 the solid). We see that each industry is concentrated at
two locations, just as in figure 17.4. All three industries have the same
locational pattern; changing the order in which the curves are repre-
sented would change only the phase of the picture, not the shape of
the curves.
   Although the number of concentrations of each industry is indepen-
dent of the number of industries, the number of economic regions in
the world is not. If there are H industries and the preferred frequency
is v, then this analysis says that the world divides up into H times v
specialized economic regions.

17.6 Center and Periphery

Our usual procedure in this book has been to assume that all locations
are identical, as a way of isolating the pure forces of geographic self-
organization rather than adulterating our analysis with inherent
locational distinctions. However, in real life not all locations are sym-
metrical, and we would like to take at least an occasional look at the
way these asymmetries might affect the emergent locational pattern.
Of particular interest is the interaction between natural geography and
industrial structure. If both regions and industries have some inherent
differences, what types of industries locate in what sorts of regions,
and how might this pattern of specialization change if trade costs are
A Seamless World                                                      323




                                                     TIma= 10




                                                     T’,,   =4




                                                     T’,,   =2




                                         locations
Figure 17.7
Industrial employment in central and peripheral locations


reduced? We have no analytical results on this issue, but simulation
reveals some suggestive patterns.
   Let us consider then as our geographical space a line of given length,
each point of which is endowed with the same quantity of labor and
specific factors. However, we no longer make this a racetrack economy:
This world line has ends, so that the economy has a priori central and
peripheral locations. With this geography, central locations have an
automatic leg up in terms of access both to markets and to suppliers
and consequently pay higher wages than do peripheral ones. How
does this affect the geography of industrial specialization?
   There are two industries, as in early sections of this chapter, but as
a first experiment, suppose that the two industries differ in their trans-
port cost parameter; to be precise, assume that trade costs in industry
1 are always twice those in industry 2. Figure 17.7 has the regions on
the horizontal and marks out the regions occupied by industry 1. It
does this for three different levels of the industries’ transport costs
(maintaining the 2: 1 transport cost difference between the industries),
with lower values on the lower panels. The upper panel was evolved
324                                                           Chapter 17


from the flat earth; the lower two were evolved by reducing trade costs
incrementally. Thus there is a punctuated equilibrium story underlying
the panels, although because we only illustrate the structure at three
distinct points, this is not apparent.
   Looking at the three panels, we observe two things. First, as we move
from higher to lower trade costs, we move to lower frequency agglom-
eration, exactly as we would expect. Second, the frequency change is
associated with dramatic changes in the location of industry. In particu-
lar, looking at the lower two panels, we see that industry 2 (with rela-
tively lower trade costs) goes from occupying the central region to
occupying the periphery. The reason for this inversion of industrial
structure can be understood in terms of forces we have already seen.
Agglomeration forces, and the market access considerations driving
them, are strongest at levels of transport costs that are, in some sense,
intermediate. In the middle panel, the lower-trade-cost industry (in-
dustry 2) has transport costs that are intermediate, so it occupies the
center ground. But in the bottom panel, trade costs in both industries
are reduced, so the higher-trade-cost industry (industry 1)is now inter-
mediate and occupies the center, with the low-trade-cost industry lo-
cating in the lower-wage periphery. Essentially, trade costs in industry
2 become low enough that agglomeration forces are relatively unim-
portant, and the industry relocates to the periphery to benefit from
lower wages.
   What about other differences in industry characteristics? Suppose
that one industry has a lower input-output coefficient a and corre-
spondingly higher labor input coefficient p. This industry is the more
local labor intensive. (It also uses labor embodied in intermediates, but
some of these are imported from other regions.) Consequently, we see
that this industry occupies the peripheral locations, where wages are
lowest. If transport costs are low, then it occupies peripheral locations
only, and the central region is occupied by the industry with the
stronger linkages. But at higher transport costs, this leaves each indus-
try too far away from some of its consumers. We therefore see the
lower-a industry occupying edge sites, plus some other zones, includ-
ing perhaps the central regions.
   The combination of even the simplest physical geography-the fact
that there are ends to the line-with the economic geography of ag-
glomeration, seems then to produce a complex set of interactions in
which reductions in trade costs can change the location of industry
dramatically."
A Seamless World                                                        325


17.7 Conclusions

The real world is anything but seamless: It remains separated by oceans
and deserts, by cultural and language differences, and by national
boundaries that continue to impose substantial practical obstacles to
trade even when there are no formal trade barriers. Still, it is interesting
both as a theoretical exercise and as a preview of what a more perfectly
integrated world might look like to investigate the geography of an
economy with space but without distinct spatial units.
   We find that even in the absence of prespecified regions, the world
tends to organize itself into zones of industrial specialization: Spatial
structure need not be imposed, because it evolves of its own accord.
Furthermore, this spatial structure is robust to changes in the model’s
parameters, because the economic geography is locked in by the inter-
dependence of firms’ location decisions. But the lock-in effect can only
hold up to some threshold, and changes in parameters beyond this
threshold trigger abrupt changes in economic geography: punctuated
equilibria. The shifts in economic geography may be dramatic, causing
the specialization of many regions to change.
   One gratifying feature of the analysis in this chapter is that it bridges
an ancient divide in economics, between location theorists (who nor-
mally think in terms of continuous space) and trade theorists (who tend
to treat countries as discrete points). The models developed here are
not, by any means, realistic, but they are general-equilibrium models
of global specialization and trade that are also as continuously spatial
as a location theorist could want. At least within the special assump-
tions we use to make the analysis tractable, the merger between trade
and location theory turns out to be . . . seamless.

Appendix 17.1: Symmetry Breaking

To analyze the dynamics we need to linearize the model around the flat
earth equilibrium. At the flat earth, zu = 1, h = V 2 and E = 1/2p. G is


                                                                   (17A.1)

As we differentiate the equilibrium, we use flat earth values of vari-
ables and exploit symmetry so that, for example, h(v)’ = h’(v)’ =
-h2(v)’.Differentiating the price indices, (17.4) and (17.5):
326                                                                Chapter 17




The wage equations, (17.6) and (17.7):




          =             [(o- l ) G ( s ) ' / G + ~PE(s)']G"-*~-'(~-  . (17A.3)
                                                              l)lr-slds
              2 J -nv
Manufacturing expenditure:


                                                                      (17A.4)

Using (17A.4) to eliminate 6 t , and equations (17.13) and (17.15), gives




                                                                      (17A.5)



from which we obtain

                                                                      (17A.6)


                                                                      (17A.7)

Replacing 0 by p (0= 1/ (1 - p)) gives equation (17.17).

Appendix 17.2: Simulation Parameters

Figure 17.1: o = 5, a = 0.4, p = 0.575, K = 0 and K = 0.025.
Figure 17.2: o = 5, a = 0.4, p = 0.575, K = 0.025.
Figure 17.3-17.6: o = 5, a = 0.4, p = 0.575, K = 0.025, T,,,       = 4.
A Seamless World                                                                        327


Figure 17.7: CJ = 5, a = 0.4, p = 0.575, K = 0.025.
  top panel: TLaX= 10, Tkax= 6.
   midde panel: TL,, = 4, Tiax = 2.5.
   bottom panel: Tkax= 2, T i a x = 1.5.

Notes

1. The term was coined by evolutionary theorists Stephen Jay Could and Niles Eldredge.
We should note that other evolutionists have been known to refer to the concept as
”evolution by jerks.”
2. In figure 17.2 we see that at very low transport costs no frequency has a p0sitiL.e
eigenvalue. Looking at (17.17) and (17.18) this may seem hard to understand: Can’t we
always match any fall in z with an equiproportional reduction in v? But in a finite econ-
omy, you cannot have fluctuations of frequency less than l! The economic intuition here
is that when z is very low, even a monopoly on the world market is not enough to get
a fluctuation going.
3. Figure 17.5was computed using sixty locations. The eigenvalues are those of the 60 X
60 differential equation system, and since we are not looking just at sinusoidal deviations
around flat earth, they are not the eigenvalues of the Turing system of section 17.2.
 Even when the equilibrium is stable (has no positive eigenvalues) there are always one
or more zero eigenvalues. The eigenvector associated with a zero eigenvalue simply
takes the form of adding industry 1 employment to one side of each industry 1 region
and removing it from the other; that is, it rotates the existing industrial structure around
our racetrack economy. This, of course, corresponds exactly to the fact that the actual
location of manufacturing regions is indeterminate.
4. Further numerical explorations of a variant of this model are contained in Venables
1998.
This page intentionally left blank
                                      External Trade and
18                                    Internal Geography




In this book we have developed three kinds of models: "regional"
models (in which manufacturing production is mobile but agriculture
is not), "urban" models (in which everything except land is mobile),
and "international" models (in which factors do not move, but the role
of intermediate goods nonetheless creates backward and forward link-
ages). In principle, of course, there is no reason why we cannot mix
assumptions-for example, by allowing intermediate goods to play a
role in regional divergence.' And there is no question that in the real
world our artificial divisions do not apply. Nonetheless, the distinction
among types of models has proved useful as a way of limiting each
analysis to the minimum necessary number of moving parts. Empirical
applications do, of course, require complicating the models, but mixed
urban-regional-international theoretical analysis should, we believe, be
undertaken only if it is essential to tell some empirically motivated
story.
   One such story was suggested in recent work by Hanson (1993),who
was examining changes in the location of Mexican industry following
changes in the trade regime. Prior to the late 1980s, Mexico followed
a classic strategy of industrial development through import substitu-
tion; the result was the emergence of an inward-looking economic base,
much of it concentrated in the immediate vicinity of Mexico City. In
the second half of the 1980s,however, Mexico began a dramatic process
of liberalization, culminating in the iYorth American Free Trade Agree-
ment. Associated with this process was a noticeable decentralization
of Mexican industry, away from Mexico City and toward centers in
the north of the country. This decentralization was obviously linked
to a shift in focus away from the domestic market and toward exports
to the United States. But why did it involve a shift of industry away
from Mexico City?
330                                                           Chapter 18


   The simplest answer, which is surely part of the truth, involved
proximity: Most of the rapidly growing centers of industry in Mexico
have been closer to the U.S. border than the capital. Hanson, how-          *

ever, suggested that this was not the whole story. Rather, he argued,
trade liberalization would have led to decentralization in any case.
The reason was that Mexico’s internal core-periphery geography-
the concentration of industry in Mexico City-has historically been
sustained, despite the high costs of operating in a congested metro-
polis, by forward and backward linkages: In an inward-looking
economy, the capital district is where firms have the best access both
to domestically produced inputs and to the domestic market. Once
the economy has turned outward, however, these linkages become
less important: A plant that receives most of its intermediate inputs
from abroad and sells most of its output to foreign markets has little
incentive to locate in the domestic core, and the diseconomies of
agglomeration outweigh the remaining linkage advantages of a core
location.
   It is a provocative story that links urban economics and international
trade policy. Some empirical evidence supporting the story has also
been offered by Ades and Glaeser (1997)who, in a sample of eighty-five
countries, found that the population of the largest city was negatively
related to the share of imports in GNP and positively related to tariff
barriers. An initial formalization of Hanson’s story was offered in
Krugman and Livas 1996. Here we offer a simplified version of the
Krugman-Livas model intended to stress the parallels with our general
approach.
   Hanson also found that the changing pattern of industrial location
was not uniform across industries. Some sectors found the pull to bor-
der regions stronger than others, and there is some evidence of increas-
ing regional specialization.2 This raises the question of whether
external trade policy interacts with industrial clustering of the sort we
analyzed in chapter 16. Does external trade liberalization promote or
inhibit internal regional specialization?
   In this chapter, we show how our theory suggests that external trade
liberalization, although it brings a spatial deconcentration of industry
as a whole, may also bring spatial clustering of particular industries,
as locations come to specialize. As we argue, both these effects provide
sources of welfare gain from international openness, over and above
the usual gains from trade.
External Trade and Internal Geography                                    331


18.1 Urban Concentration in an Open Economy

We consider a world economy consisting of three locations: 1, 2, and
0 (for the outside economy). All three locations can trade with each
other, but labor is mobile only between the "domestic" locations, 1
and 2.
  Labor is the only factor of production; and we let location 0 labor
be the numeraire. The labor force in 0 we denote Lo, and we choose
units so that the total domestic labor force is 1, with a share h in location
1, 1 - h in location 2. The incomes of the three regions can then be
written
yo = Lo,                                                              (18.1)


Y2 = (1 -   h)zu;?.                                                   (18.3)
   Initially we assume a single manufacturing sector that uses labor to
produce differentiated goods with the usual Dixit-Stiglitz setup. (No-
tice that, in contrast with chapter 5, there is no agricultural sector in
this economy; in the notation of that chapter, we have set p = 1.)It is
costly to ship goods in all directions. We assume that if a good is
shipped between either of the two domestic locations, only a fraction
1/ T arrives; if a good is shipped between either domestic location and
the outside world, only a fraction 1/ T o arrives. This external transport
cost is the same for both internal locations, so we are not allowing one
location the advantage of proximity to location 0.
   This implies price and wage equations of the usual form:
Go = [Lo + h(ZUlTo)l-" + (1 - ~)(w~TO)~-"]~/I-",                      (18.4)


                                                                      (18.6)
                                                                      (18.7)


  As we have set it up so far, this model contains no form of diminish-
ing returns. Because there is only one factor of production, and it is
mobile between the two domestic locations, there is no apparent reason
why all labor should not concentrate in one location or the other. To
332                                                             Chapter 18


produce an interesting tension between centripetal and centrifugal
forces, then, we must introduce some countervailing force. Once such
force would be the existence of immobile factors, such as land; indeed,
that is how we have created a tension in other models. For simplicity,
however, in this case we simply postulate the existence of some kind
of congestion diseconomy to city size and put it directly into the real-
wage equation.3 We therefore write real wages in each location as
                                                                    (18.9)


The terms (1 - A)& and h6capture the congestion cost in each location,
and we assume that 6 E (0, 1).4This means that as a location's popula-
tion increases (other things equal), its real wage falls at an increasing
rate, going to zero if the location has the country's entire population.
The regional allocation of labor, h, adjusts according to the difference
between the real wage in each region and the average for the economy
as a whole.
   We are now in a position to ask the following question: How does
the integration of the domestic economy with the outside world, as
measured by the cost To,affect the equilibrium allocation of labor be-
tween the two domestic locations?

18.2 The Effects of Trade Liberalization

We begin with a numerical analysis. Figure 18.1 illustrates the equilib-
rium location of the domestic labor force, measured by h, as a function
of the external trade cost, To. As usual, stable equilibria are marked
with solid lines, and unstable with a dashed line. We see that an equal
division of population between the two sites occurs at low values of
the external trade cost, To,whereas at higher values the two sites have
different populations.
   The easiest way to get intuition on this is to consider the stability of
the equilibrium in which population is evenly divided between the
locations. At low values of To, the economy is outward oriented, with
domestic producers in each location selling a high proportion of their
output to the external market. If we move a unit of labor from location
2 to location 1, this enlarges the market in location 1 and reduces it in
2, tending to make 1 a more attractive location, but this backward-
linkage effect is quite weak-because such a high proportion of firms'
External Trade and Internal Geography                                   333




      1 .o        1.2         1.4          1.6            To
Figure 18.1
The bifurcation diagram


sales are directed not to these markets, but to the external market. Pull-
ing in the other direction is the congestion cost, and this is the more
powerful force. The equilibrium is therefore stable.
   The difference at high Tois now apparent. At high To,firms are more
dependent on the internal market, so movement of labor creates more
powerful backward-linkage effects. This makes the equilibrium with
two equal-sized production centers unstable.
   If having two equal-sized production centers does not lead to a stable
equilibrium, what then happens? From our modeling of congestion
costs, it is clear that the economy does not end up at a corner solution,
with the entire population in a single location: If this happened, the
cost of living in this location would be infinite and the real wage 0;
see equations (18.9) and (18.10). Instead, then, we have two centers of
production, but they are of unequal sizes. One is large, with the benefits
of linkages but the costs of congestion, and the other smaller.
   Figure 18.1allows us to read off the fictitious history of a trade liber-
alization’s effects on the internal geography. We see that starting from
a high value of external trade barriers, liberalization brings a steady
narrowing in the difference in size of the two locations. Access to exter-
nal markets reduces the smaller location’s disadvantage and permits
its growth. This process occurs at an accelerating rate until the bifurca-
tion point is reached and the two locations become of equal size.
334                                                               Chapter 18


   Let us now characterize this bifurcation point analytically. As usual,
we can do this by linearizing the model around the symmetric equilib-
rium h = 0.5 and deriving an expression for d o / d h (using the notation
do = do,= -do2,and so on). It is not possible to derive simple closed-
form solutions for the domestic price and wage at the symmetric equi-
librium, G and 10, but they are implicitly defined by equations given
in appendix 18.1. In that appendix, we derive
d oh -
~- -
           Z(20 - 1)
                            -6
d h 0 [0+ Z ( 0 - l)](0- 1)
                                                                     (18.11)


where Z is defined by

                                                                     (18.12)

   This result has an immediate interpretation. The first term should
look familiar: It is a version of our standard expression for forward
and backward linkages. (Compare this with equation (5.27) with p =
1.)In this particular version, the first term is always positive and cap-
tures the centripetal forces in the model. The second term represents
the diseconomies of urban concentration.
   The symmetric equilibrium is unstable if d o / d h is positive. We can
see immediately that this expression is negative when Z = 0 and is
increasing in Z,becoming positive providing that congestion costs, 6,
are not too large.
   Z depends on parameters directly, and through the expressions for
G and 711 given in appendix 18.1.If we focus on external transport costs,
then it can be shown that Z is increasing in these costs, because G and
   are respectively increasing and decreasing in To. (A higher value of
external transport costs raises the price of imports, so raising the price
index, and reduces export opportunities, so reducing the wage.) The
fact that 2 is increasing in To means that higher external trade costs
may destabilize the symmetric equilibrium and lead to an asymmetric
equilibrium with two unequal-sized cities. In other words, provided 6
is not too large, the configuration of equilibria is as illustrated in figure
18.1.Making the economy more open also makes its internal structure
less geographically concentrated.
External Trade and Internal Geography                                   335


   It is worth making several further remarks on the implications of
this model. The first concerns the comparative statics of the critical
point. The critical value of To is higher (so the economy is more likely
to have cities of equal size) the higher is 6, the higher is Lo, and the
lower is T . Unsurprisingly, higher congestion costs deter agglomera-
tion, and a larger foreign population is like being more open: It raises
the share of exports in each firm's sales. Lower internal transport costs
weaken the agglomeration forces inside the economy, again making it
more likely that the economy has two cities of equal size.
   The second remark concerns the type of bifurcation. The model pro-
duces a pitchfork, but as usual this is sensitive to the modeling of the
centrifugal force (here the congestion costs). Suppose that the relation-
ship between real wages and congestion, instead of taking the form
col = zul(l - h ) ' / G l , is linear in the congestion externality, so o1=
w 1/ G l - 6h. Simulating this case, the bifurcation turns out to be a toma-
hawk. Clearly, wages do not go to infinity as h goes to one, and more
fundamentally, the third derivative of o with respect to h is positive,
so the function passes from concave to convex at the point of symmetry
breaking.

18.3 Industrial Clustering and External Trade

We have just seen that increased openness to external trade may cause
the spatial deconcentration of internal population and of manufactur-
ing activity as a whole. What does it do to the concentration of particu-
lar industries? Do firms in particular industries tend to cluster in a
single location or be dispersed among locations?
   The two-sector model of industrial specialization developed in chap-
ter 16 provides the apparatus for answering this question. Recall that
in this model industrial linkages create the centripetal force-firms
benefit from proximity to their industrial suppliers and customers-
and the centrifugal force arises from final consumer demand in each
10cation.~As we open the economy to external trade, both these forces
are weakened. Firms use more imported intermediates and sell a larger
proportion of their output as exports, and consumers derive a higher
proportion of their consumption from imports. But how does the bal-
ance between these forces change?
   We answer this question in two stages. First, we assume that domes-
tic population is evenly divided between two domestic locations and
336                                                              Chapter 18


see whether external trade liberalization promotes the clustering of in-
dustries. Second, we go on to combine this with the model of earlier
sections of this chapter, adding congestion costs and permitting labor
 mobility between locations. We find a startlingly rich set of outcomes.
There is a hierarchy of domestic locations, in which locations have dif-
 ferent population sizes and different industrial structures. External
 trade liberalization causes deconcentration of population and simulta-
neously, the clustering of particular industries.
    Starting with a fixed internal population distribution requires only
 a relatively minor generalization of the model of chapter 16. Let there
be two industries and three regions, two internal and one external, as
 in section 18.1. Industries are referred to by superscripts and loca-
 tion by subscripts, so for example, industry i employment in region
j is Lj. We hold the industrial composition of the outside region con-
 stant by fixing LA = L i = L 0 / 2 . Initially we assume that each internal
 location has a fixed population, set at one-half the domestic economy's
 population (of unity). Thus for each domestic location, j = 1, 2, we
 have
L,' + Lf = 0.5.                                                     (18.13)
Within each of these domestic locations, labor moves between indus-
tries according to the wage difference which, because all workers
within the same region face the same cost-of-living index, is just the
nominal wage difference.
   The price index for each industry in each region, GI, is

(Gf)'   =    1
            L=0, 1,2
                       L;(zo;)' Pa(G;)-aa(T$)la,                    (18.14)

where a and p = 1 - a are the intermediate and labor shares respec-
tively, and T;, is the cost of shipping industry i output from location k
to location j . We look just at cases where both industries have the same
external trade costs To and internal trade costs T.h
   The wage equations take the form

                                                                    (18.15)
                        G0,1,2

and expenditure on industry i in location j is given by

                                                                     (18.16)
External Trade and Internal Geography                                 337


(These three equations are analogous to (16.3)-(16.8),but with the addi-
tion of the outside location and with y = 0.)
   As usual, this model has a symmetric equilibrium, and appendix
18.1 gives the values of endogenous variables at this equilibrium. The
question is, what happens to the stability of this equilibrium as we
change the external trade costs, To? Let us go straight to analytics. In
appendix 18.1, we derive,

&G=           [(20 - 1)a - Z(o(1   + a2) - l)]
dL7u      A
                                                                   (18.17)



where L is the symmetric equilibrium value of Lf, A > 0, and Z is de-
fined by
              pa-1

z = L($              (1 - T1-O).                                   (18.18)

   The sign of dzu/dL is positive for small Z and negative for Z close to
unity (providing a < p). Z is increasing in T and in To,the latter effect
coming (as in section 18.2)via the dependence of G/7o on To.This means
that decreasing either internal or external trade barriers may switch
dzu/dh from negative to positive, taking the economy through the point
of symmetry breaking. Figure 18.2 illustrates some possibilities. The
BB lines give the break point values of T and To,drawn for three differ-
ent values of Lo, Lo = 1,2, and 10. The symmetric equilibrium is stable
above these lines and unstable below them. We see that the more open
is the economy (the lower is Toor the larger is L,) the more likely it is
that the symmetric equilibrium is unstable. Of course, even if the econ-
omy is closed, there is always a value of T below which symmetry is
broken, as in chapter 16.
   When the symmetric equilibrium is unstable, there is a pair of
stable equilibria in which each region specializes in a single industry,
exactly as we saw in chapter 16.7 From our current perspective,
the point is then that external trade liberalization turns out to have ef-
fects similar to the reductions in internal trade costs that we studied
in chapter 16. Firms and consumers become more outward oriented,
but the dominant force is that consumers depend less on local
firms. This causes symmetry to be broken and industrial clustering to
occur.
338                                                         Chapter 18




                     dw/dL > 0
      1 .o     1.2      1.4       1.6        1.8    T"
Figure 18.2
Break points


18.4 Industrial Structure and Urban Concentration

Let us now pull together the elements of preceding sections and con-
sider what happens when labor is mobile between industries within
each location, and also between locations. To do this, we need to spec-
ify the dynamics of labor mobility between industries within each do-
mestic locatior., and also between locations. We do this by assuming
that labor moves between industries within a location according to the
difference between the industry wage and the average wage in the loca-
tion. And it moves between locations according to the difference be-
tween the average wage in the location and the average wage in the
economy as a whole.
   Formally, we define 8, as the share of location i employment which
is in industry 1, so with h denoting the share of total population in
location 1, we have

      L ; = hel,        L: = qi - el),
                                                                (18.19)
L ; = (I - A)&,      L: = (1 - h)(i - 0,).
The interindustry (and intralocational) dynamics are then given by dif-
ferential equations

                                                                (18.20)
External Trade and Internal Geography                                 339


where yeis the adjustment speed and ?Efis the average wage in region i,
      = e,zu,' + (I - e,)zu;.
-
20,                                                                (18.21)
Interlocational labor mobility is given by

h = yh(w1 - 0 ) h ,                                                (18.22)
where yl is the adjustment speed, w1 and o2are average real wages in
each region, and 0 is the average real wage in the economy,
wl = zu,(~:~;)-0.5(1- xy,
w2          E2(G:G:)-'.'AS,                                        (18.23)


   The model is completely described by equations (18.14)-(18.16)and
(18.19)-(18.23). If    = 0, this is the model of section 18.3, and if ye =
0 and a = 0, it reduces to the model of section 18.1.*
   We present no analytical results on this model, but instead use nu-
merical techniques to illustrate how openness to international trade
may change the structure of the economy. Figure 18.3 has the external
transport cost on the horizontal axis and employment levels on the
vertical, like figure 18.1. Unlike figure 18.1, it does not provide a full

  1.01
        I




  0.5




  0.0
                                                 1.6        '0

Figure 18.3
External trade and internal economic geography
340                                                                Chapter 18


description of all equilibria, but instead traces out a particular equilib-
rium path that the economy follows as external trade costs are reduced.
   The starting position is a high value of To,at which point one of the
locations (call it location 1) has most of the population and most of
both industries. L! is this location’s employment in industry 1, and
L: its employment in industry 2, these summing to L,. The other loca-
tion has a very much smaller total population, all of which is employed
in one of the industries, so L2 = Li > 0 and Li = 0. The situation is therefore
one of concentration of total population and dispersion of industry, inso-
far as the larger location has employment in both industries.’ This is remi-
niscent of the city hierarchy we saw in chapter 11, in which a location
with a large population has both types of industrial activity and coexists
with a smaller location specialized in a single industry.
   Now consider the effects of reducing the external trade barrier. As
we do so, two sorts of changes take place. First, the larger region loses
total population to the smaller one ( L , = L: + L: falls). As we saw in
section 18.2, the backward linkages from consumer expenditure are
less powerful as the economy becomes more open, and so the centrifu-
gal forces created by the congestion costs disperse the population. Sec-
ond, the larger region becomes more specialized, losing industry 2 to
location 2 (L: falls, and L: rises), because external trade now plays the
role of balancing supply and demand for each sector’s products in each
location, and this facilitates industrial specialization driven by intra-in-
dustry linkages. Reducing To further eventually leads the economy to
the point where the two locations have equal populations and are both
fully specialized in one of the industries. External trade liberalization
therefore brings dispersion of population but concentration of industry.
   The outcomes illustrated in figure 18.3 are interesting both because
they show how external trade liberalization can change internal eco-
nomic geography, and also because they show how a quite complex
internal geography can develop. Both industries and both internal loca-
tions are constructed to be symmetrical but, over a wide range of values
of TO,the economy has a regional hierarchy. One location has a large
population and a presence in both industries, whereas the other loca-
tion has a smaller population and specializes in a single industry.

18.5 Conclusions

We are accustomed to thinking of the gains from international trade
as deriving from consumer gains and from producer gains that occur
as industrial structure changes to exploit comparative advantage. To
External Trade and Internal Geography                                 341


these, the trade and industrial organization literature added possible
procompetitive gains from trade, as production within an industry re-
organizes in response to trade. The analysis of this chapter suggests
some further mechanisms through which international trade may
change the welfare of the domestic economy. Trade may generate a
reorganization of internal economic geography, bringing both a disper-
sion of manufacturing activity as a whole and the clustering of particu-
lar industries. We have derived no analytical results on the welfare
effects of these changes, although intuition (supported by simulation
analysis) suggests gains. Congestion costs are increasing and convex
in population, so spreading population more evenly tends to raise wel-
fare. And as we have already seen in chapter 16, there are real income
gains from industrial clustering, deriving from the proximity of closely
linked firms.

Appendix 18.1: Symmetry Breaking

The appendix is based on the general model of equations (18.14)-
(18.16) and (18.19)-(18.23). The symmetric equilibrium values of em-
ployment are LA = Li = L0/2 and L: = Li = Ll = Li = %. Symmetric
equilibrium values of other variables follow the notational convention,
for rest of the world, Go E GA = G;, and for internal variables G =
G: = G: = Gi = G:, etc. The symmetric equilibrium values are




     E=       W
                         E0   =
                                     LO
          4(1 - a)'               2(1 - a)'
  We want to find the effects of a small change in the allocation of
labor between locations or sectors. Consider a change d L that alters the
labor allocation according to
d L ; = dL, dL: = JdL, dLi = -dL,        dLi = -JdL.             (18A.2)
  If J = 1, then the change d L adds to both industries in location 1 and
subtracts from both in location 2. We use this perturbation to test for
342                                                            Chapter 18


stability of the locational migration model of section 18.2, to which the
general model collapses when a = 0. (When a = 0, having two sym-
metrical industries in each location produces outcomes no different
from having just one.)
   If J = -1, then the change expands employment in location 1 indus-
try 1 while holding total employment in each location and industry
constant, and we use this perturbation to test for stability of the indus-
trial clustering model (compare (18A.2) with (16.18)).
   Totally differentiating the equilibrium conditions (18.14)-(18.16) and
using Z defined in (18.18)gives
                r                             1


                                                                  (18A.3)


                                                                  (18A.4)


                                                                  (18A.5)

Eliminating d E / E from this we obtain




                                           [][
 (o(1 - a) - 1)Z      1 - o + aoz
                                                                  (18A.6)
    (1 - a)o - ZB    ao + Z(1 - 0)
                                     ]         =
                                                    ZB   -




where B = (1 + a ) / 2 + j(l - a ) / 2 .
 If = 1 and a = 0, then we derive
iiG L - - Z(1 - Z ) o
                                                                  (18A.7)
 G dL         A      ’

                                                                  (18A.8)

with the determinant, A, taking the form
A     (1 - Z ) [ O+ Z ( O - 1)](0- 1).                            (18A.9)

The change in real wages is d m / o = dzo/zu - dG/G - 6 d L / L , from
which we derive equation (18.11).
  I f ] = -1, then
External Trade and Internal Geography                                                       343



dzu
-- =
    L
 w dL A
            z
        [(20 - 1)a - Z(o(1 + a 2 )- l)],                                             (18A.10)

A = (0- l)0(1 - a) + Z a ( I - 2 0 )
                                                                                     (18A.11)
      +Z2[d +           ((3   - 1)(1- o(l - a))]> 0.


Appendix 18.2: Simulation Parameters

Figure 18.1: (3 = 5, Lo = 2, T = 1.25, 6 = 0.1.
Figure 18.2: CJ = 5, Lo = 1, 2, 10, a = 0.05.
Figure 18.3: (3 = 5, Lo = 2, T = 1.25, 6 = 0.1, a = 0.05.

Notes

1. For example, Puga (1998) looks at a model with labor mobility and linkages within
the industrial sector.
2. This specialization is at the two-digit, although not the four-digit, level (Hanson 1993).
3, Krugman and Livas 1996 treats land rent explicitly. For current purposes, however,
all that matters is that there be some kind of centrifugal force, and we opt for the simplest
version.
4. Location 1 congestion costs as a proportion of income are 1 - (1 - A)8, so they are
increasing and convex in population.
5. And depending on model specification, it also arises from immobile factor supply,
as in section 16.5.
6. Formally, if k = j , Ti, = 1. If k f j , Ti, = To,if either k or j = 0, and TA, = T otherwise.
7. And the bifurcation is a tomahawk, just as was the case in chapter 16.
8. Unlike in section 18.1, there are two industries, but if they are symmetric and have
no internal linkages (i.e., a = 0) then the model’s behavior is independent of the number
of industries.
9. Only at much higher internal and external transport costs d o we observe the smaller
location having both industries.
This page intentionally left blank
19                                   The Way Forward




In this book we have pursued the consequences of two quite simple
ideas. The first idea is that, in a world where increasing returns and
transport costs are both important, forward and backward linkages can
create a circular logic of agglomeration. That is, other things being the
same, producers want to locate close to their suppliers and to their
customers-which means that they want to locate close to each other.
The second idea is that the immobility of some resources-land cer-
tainly, and in many cases labor-acts as a centrifugal force that op-
poses the centripetal force of agglomeration. And the tension between
these centrifugal and centripetal forces shapes the evolution of the
economy’s spatial structure.
   We have seen that these two ideas can give insights into a remarkable
range of phenomena, from the broad division of national economies
into manufacturing and farm belts, to the spontaneous emergence of
highly structured urban hierarchies, to the dynamics of the product
cycle in international trade. What is more, the models we construct to
analyze many different issues turn out to have similar ”deep struc-
tures”: the same equations reappear, albeit with somewhat different
interpretations of the parameters, and the qualitative behavior of the
model economy usually turns on a couple of repeated expressions re-
flecting the tension between centripetal and centrifugal forces.
   All in all, the flexibility of our basic approach and the underlying
unity of its implications have proved gratifying. Yet as is always the
case in economics, the modeling resolves some issues only to raise oth-
ers. What are the next steps in this emergent field?
   We would suggest four important directions for future work: enlarg-
ing the theoretical ”menu”; buttressing the approach with empirical
work; going from hypothetical calculations to real quantification; and
addressing the welfare and policy implications of the whole approach.
346                                                             Chapter 19


19.1 The Theoretical Menu

One useful way to think about modeling choices in economic geogra-
phy is in terms of a menu of possible options, as in the following table:
Centripetal forces                           Centrifugal forces
Linkages                                     Immobile factors
Thick markets                                Land rent / commuting
Knowledge spillovers and other               Congestion and other pure
pure external economies                      diseconomies
   On the left we show the Marshallian trinity of external economies,
already described in chapter 1.On the right we show a somewhat com-
parable trinity of forces opposing agglomeration. There can be little
doubt not only that all of these forces operate in the real world, but
that all have at least some bearing on almost any real-world issue in
economic geography one might discuss. Yet that is, of course, not the
way we have approached the subject. In economic modeling it is natu-
ral and generally appropriate for the theorist to simplify matters, to
focus on only some of the possibilities. So in our modeling we have
generally allowed only for linkages as a force for concentration, factor
immobility as a force against.
   There are, of course, other possible choices. The traditional von
Thunen analysis of land use may be interpreted as one in which pure
external economies create an urban center, and land-rent gradients de-
termine use around that center; the urban system literature of Hender-
son and followers in effect chooses to focus on pure external economies
and diseconomies, generating an inverted- U relationship between pop-
ulation and utility. We ourselves have in some places departed from
our normal modeling choices: The urban models of part I11 have a
touch of von Thunen to them, and the trade-and-urbanization model
of chapter 18 invokes pure external diseconomies as a source of centrif-
ugal forces.
   Still, we believe that it would be useful to carry out a more systematic
exploration of the implications of our menu, to inquire into the behav-
ior of models in which multiple centripetal and centrifugal forces are
operating, to ask how the predictions of those models depend on the
relative importance of those forces. Only by carrying out such an explo-
ration will we be in a position to interpret the results of the obvious
next step: empirical research.
The Way Forward                                                        347


19.2 Empirical Work

As a general rule, economic models with increasing returns and imper-
fect competition have proved difficult subjects for empirical work.
Someone once remarked of textbooks in industrial organization that
before the theoretical revolution of the 1970s, they contained many
facts but little theory, and afterward they contained a lot of theory-
period. One reason for this relative paucity of empirical work may be
that models with imperfect competition and increasing returns are typ-
ically strongly nonlinear in their implications, posing a difficult chal-
lenge for traditional econometric methods. Another barrier to empirical
work may be that to develop theoretically tractable models it is neces-
sary to make simplifying assumptions that are difficult to relax, even
though real-world data clearly demand that they be modified.
   Still, empirical work that is at least informed by the new models
has been an important part of the “new trade” and ”new growth”
revolutions, helping to provide at least a set of stylized facts and some
constraints on plausible magnitudes. Some important work has already
been conducted along similar lines in the new economic geography:
cross-sectional studies of urban areas (e.g., Glaeser, Scheinkman, and
Shleifer 1995), international comparisons (e.g., Ades and Glaeser 1997),
and-recently-even       some efforts to estimate structural equations, like
the ”market potential function,” implied by new geography models
(Hanson 1998). We clearly need much more such work, as closely tied
to the theoretical models as possible, as a way of sorting through which
of the intriguing possibilities suggested by the sorts of models devel-
oped in this book are truly relevant, as well as to indicate where further
elaboration of the models is necessary.

19.3 Quantification

In certain fields of economics, notably public finance and international
trade, quantified models play an important role as analytical tools.
By a quantified model we do not exactly mean a model fitted to
actual data; rather, we mean a theoretically consistent model whose
parameters are based on some mix of data and assumptions, so that
realistic simulation exercises can be carried out. The computable gen-
eral equilibrium models often used for trade policy analysis are of
this type; so are the calibrated models that have played an impor-
tant role in the discussion of trade policy under imperfect competition.
348                                                              Chapter 19


(See, for example, the studies in Krugman and Smith 1993.) Although
such models cannot be directly tested, they are often highly suggestive:
For example, computable models of world trade have induced applied
policy analysts to give much more weight to terms of trade impacts
than is usual in the purely theoretical literature, and calibrated models
in strategic trade did much to suggest that concerns over the interna-
tional distribution of rents were of little practical importance.
   We would clearly like to be able to carry out similar exercises for
economic geography-to develop, if you like, "computable geographi-
cal equilibrium" models. In particular, we would like to have at least a
first-pass estimate of the bifurcation diagrams for real situations: Under
what conditions do economies really spontaneously evolve a core-
periphery pattern? Is Europe really going to be able to maintain its
polycentric industrial geography?
   Such modeling is not easy. (We have made some preliminary efforts,
and found enough technical difficulties to be unwilling to put them in
this book!) Probably it will be necessary to introduce some new techni-
cal tricks to make the models consistent with the data (just as CGE
models in trade generally depend on some version of the "Armington
assumption"-an ad hoc assumption about tastes-to match the actual
pattern of multilateral trade).
   The payoff to such modeling would, however, be a major step to-
ward making theoretical economic geography an actual predictive dis-
cipline, able to evaluate the impacts of hypothetical shocks-including
policy changes-on the economy's spatial structure.

19.4 Welfare Implications

Some readers may have noticed a certain reticence on our part about
welfare implications. In some cases the conclusions are clear: For
example, in the models of international specialization developed in
chapter 14, you would rather have your country become the indus-
trialized, high-wage core than the low-wage periphery. But in general
we have tended to stress the positive rather than normative economics
of geography.
   There are at least three reasons for that reticence. First, we feel that
an economic approach ought to demonstrate its power to explain real-
ity before it is used to prescribe it; to turn Marx on his head, the initial
point ought to be to explain the world, not to change it.
The Way Forward                                                        349


   Second is a more subtle point. The case for policy intervention typi-
cally rests on market failures, especially on externalities positive or
negative: We think that the government should promote technological
spillovers, discourage pollution. The spatial structure of an economy
is, however, to an important extent the result of a tug-of-war between
external economies and diseconomies, between the linkages and infor-
mation spillovers that foster concentration, and between congestion
and other diseconomies that discourage it. Which externalities matter
more? For example, are big cities too big (just look at the traffic, the
air pollution, the crime) or too small (think of the payoff to close-range
interaction in a place like London or New York). The truth is that no-
body knows, and nobody will know until there has been a lot of hard
empirical work on the matter. More or less by definition, pure theoreti-
cal speculation cannot answer this question.
   Finally, we have been engaged in a deliberate bit of intellectual strat-
egizing. In the previous history of attempts to bring increasing returns
into economics, most notably in the case of the new trade theory, there
was something of a rush on the part of outsiders to hijack the new
theories on behalf of interventionist policies. It later became apparent
that this was premature: the policy implications of the new ideas were
far more subtle in practice than the crude neomercantilism on whose
behalf they were invoked. There will, surely, be important policy impli-
cations from the new economic geography, but we want the field on
a solid theoretical and empirical footing before it begins speculating
about potential interventions. That said, in the end one of the main
points of economics is to provide policy guidance, and we would hope
and expect the approach in this book eventually to give rise to a set of
useful guidelines for actual regional, urban, and perhaps international
trade policies.

19.5 Where We Stand

In the end, the main justification for studying the geography of econo-
mies is that it is so visible and important a part of the world. It is hard
to see any reason-other than tradition, based on analytical intractabil-
ity-why interregional and urban economics should receive any less
attention than international trade, why the location of production
should not be as central a concern of mainstream economics as capital
theory or the distribution of income. In this book we have shown how
350                                                          Chapter 19


one particular approach to the spatial economy works, and have
shown, if nothing else, its ability to tell a wide range of interesting
stories. There will be other approaches, and some of the stories will
turn out to be more suggestive than convincing. But there is now no
excuse for neglecting the spatial aspect of economic life. It has always
been interesting and important; now it is possible to study it as rigor-
ously as one likes.
  One might say that the study of economic geography is a subject
whose time has come. But we would prefer, for obvious reasons, to
say that it is a subject which has finally found its proper place.
                                                   References




Ades, A. F., and E. L. Glaeser. (1997). ”Trade and circuses: explaining urban giants.”
Qiinrferly Ioztrrznl of Ecorionzics 1lO(1): 195-227.
Alonso, W. (1964). Location atid Land Use. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Amiti, M. (1997). “Specialisation patterns in Europe.” Discussion paper no. 363, Centre
for Economic Performance, London School of Economics.
Anderson, S. P., A. de Palma, and J.-F. Thisse. (1992). Discrctc Choice Theor!/ (?fProtlirct
Differeritiatiori.” Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Armington, P. S. (1969). “The geographic pattern of trade and the effects of price
changes.” IMF Staff Pnpers 17: 488-523.
Arthur, B. (1994). lrzcrensiiig Retitrris mid Path Depeizdeizcc iiz tlzr Ecorioniy. Ann Arbor: Uni-
versity of Michigan Press.
Bairoch, P. (1988). Cities arid Econonzic Dez?eloprnent:From the Dn~u17of Histol-y to the Prcscrzt.
Translated by C. Braider. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Baumol, W. J., and R. E. Gomory. (1987). “Inefficient and locally stable trade equilibria
under scale economies: Comparative advantage revisited.” Kyklos 49: 509-540.
Beckmann, M., and J.-F. Thisse. (1986). “The location of production activities.” In P. Nij-
kamp, ed., Handbook of Regional Economics. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 21-95.
Blaug, M. (1997). Economic Theory in Retrospect. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Borchert, J. R. (1967). “American metropolitan evolution.” Geographicnl Rrz7iei17 57: 301-
332.
Brulhart, M., and J. Torstensson. (1996). ”Regional integration, scale economies, and in-
dustry location in the European Union.” Discussion paper no. 1435, Centre for Economic
Policy Research, London.
Calmette, M.-F., and J. Le-Pottier. (1995). ”Localisation des activites; un modele bi-
sectoriel avec couts de transport.” Revue Ecoriottiiqite 46 (3): 901 -909.
Carroll, G. (1982). “National city size distributions: What d o we know after 67 years of
research?” Progress in Hitniatz Geography 6: 1-43.
Chisholm, M. (1990). Regiotzs in Recessiori atid Resirrgerzce. London: Hyman.
352                                                                             References


Christaller, W. (1933). Central Places in Southern Gernrnny. Jena, Germany: Fischer (English
translation by C. W. Baskin, London: Prentice Hall, 1966).
Cronon, W. (1991). Natzire’s Metropolis: Chicago and the Great West. New York: Norton.
Davis, D., and D. Weinstein. (1999). ”Economic geography and regional production
structure: An empirical investigation.” European Ecorzoniic Rezt,iew,February.
Deaton, A., and J. Muellbauer. (1980). Ecorzorriics arid Consittrier Behaviour. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Dicken, P., and P. Lloyd. Location in Space: Theoretical Perspectives in Ecorzornic Geography.
New York: Harper and Row.
Dixit, A. K., and J. E. Stiglitz. (1977), ”Monopolistic competition and optimum product
diversity.” Arnerican Economic Rezjiezu 67 (3): 297-308.
Dobkins, L. H., and Y. M. Ioannides. (1996). “Evolution of the U.S. city size distribution.”
Mimeograph, Tufts University, Medford, MA.
Ellison, G., and E. L. Glaeser. (1997). ”Geographic concentration in U. S. manufacturing
industries: A dartboard approach.” ]ozrrrral of Political Economy 105: 889-927.
Engel, C., and J. H. Rogers. (1996). “How wide is the border,” American Ecorzonzic Revim
86(5): 1112-1125.
Ethier, W. J. (1982). “National and international returns to scale in the modern theory
of international trade.” Anrerican Economic Revieiu 72: 389-405.
Fetter, F. A. (1924). “The economic law of market areas.” Qztarterly jozrrnal of Econornics
38: 520-529.
Fujita, M. (1988). “A monopolistic competition model of spatial agglomeration: Differen-
tiated product approach.” Regional Science and Urban Econonrics 18: 87-124.
Fujita, M. (1989). Urban Economic TIieory: Land Use and City Size. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Fujita, M., and P. Krugman. (1995). ”When is the economy monocentric? von Thiinen
and Chamberlin unified,” Regional Scierice arzd Urban Economics 25: 505-528.
Fujita, M., P. Krugman, and T. Mori. (1995). “On the evolution of hierarchical urban
systems,” Discussion paper no. 419, Institute of Economic Research, Kyoto University,
Kyoto, Japan.
Fujita, M., and T. Mori. (1996). “The role of ports in the making of major cities: Self-
agglomeration and hub-effect.” Journal of Development Economics 49: 93-120.
Fujita, M., and T. Mori. (1997). “Structural stability and evolution of urban systems.”
Regional Science and Urban Economics 27: 399-442.
Fujita, M., and H. Ogawa. (1982). “Multiple equilibria and structural transition of non-
monocentric urban configuration.” Regional Science and Urban Economics 12: 161-196.
Gabaix, X. (1997). “Zipf‘s law for cities: An explanation,” Mimeograph, Harvard Univer-
sity, Cambridge, MA.
Garreau, J. (1991). Edge City: Life on the New Frontier. New York: Doubleday.
Glaeser, E. L., J. Scheinkman, and A. Shleifer. (1995). ”Economic growth in a cross-section
of cities.” jourrzal of Monetary Economics 36: 117-143.
References                                                                              353


Grandmont, J.-M. (1988). ”Nonlinear difference equations, bifurcations and chaos: an
introduction.” Working paper no. 8811, Institute for Mathematical Studies in the Social
Sciences, Stanford, CA.
Grossman, G., and E. Helpman. (1991).Innovation arid Growth in the World Economy. Cam-
bridge: MIT Press.
Hanson, G. (1996). ”Increasing returns, trade, and the regional structure of wages.” Mim-
eograph, University of Texas, Austin.
Hanson, G. (1998). ”Market potential, increasing returns, and geographic concentration.”
Mimeograph, University of Texas, Austin.
Harris, C. (1954). ”The market as a factor in the localization of industry in the United
States.” Annals of the Association of American Geographers 64: 315-348.
Helliwell, J. (1997). ”National borders, trade, and migration.” Working paper no. 6027,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Helpman, E., and P. Krugman. (1985). Market Structure and Foreign Trade. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Henderson, J. V. (1974). ”The sizes and types of cities.“ Arrrcricarr Ecorronric Revicuf 64,
640-656.
Henderson, J. V. (1980). “Community development: The effects of growth and uncer-
tainty.” American Economic Review 70: 894-910.
Henderson, J. V. (1988). Urban development: Theory, Fact, and lllirsion. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Hirschman, A. (1958). The Strategy of Economic Development. New Haven, CT: Yale Uni-
versity Press.
Hoover, E. M. (1948). The Location of Economic Activity. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Hoover, E. M., and R. Vernon. (1959). Anatomy of a Metropolis: The Changing Distribution
of People and Jobs within the New York Metropolitan Region. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
Hotelling, H. (1929). ”Stability in competition.” Economic Journal 39: 41 -57.
Ijiri, Y., and H. Simon. (1977). S   h Distributions and fhe Sizrs of Business Firms. Amster-
dam, North-Holland.
Isard, W. (1956). Locution and Space-Economy. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Jones, R. (1971). “A three factor model in theory, trade and history.” In J. Bhagwati,
R. W. Jones, R. A. Mundell, and J. Vanek, eds., Trade, Balance of Payments, arid Growth.
Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 3-21.
Karaska, G., and D. Bramhall, eds. (1969). Locational Analysis for Manufacturing. Cam-
bridge: MIT Press.
Kauffman, S. (1993). The Origins of Order. New York: Oxford University Press.
Keeble, D. E., P. L. h e n s , and C. Thompson. (1982). ”Regional accessibility and eco-
nomic potential in the European Community.” Regional Studies 16: 419-432.
Kenen, P. (1965). ”Nature, capital, and trade.” Jozirnnl of Political Economy 73: 437-
460.
354                                                                                References


Kim, S. (1995). ”Expansion of markets and the geographic distribution of economic activi-
ties: the trends in U. S. regional manufacturing structure, 1860-1987.” Qzrarterly joirrrinl
of Ecoiiorrrics 1lO(4):881-908.
Krugman, P. R. (1980). ’’Scale economics, product differentiation, and the pattern of
                                          70:
trade.” Atrzericarz Ecoizotrzic R C Z T ~ P W 950-959.
Krugman, P. R (19914. “Increasing returns and economic geography.” joztrrinl of Political
ELYJt 10 ttZ!/ 99: 483-499.
Krugman, P. R. (1991b). Gcograyhy and Trade. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Krugman, P. R. (1993a). ”Onthe number and location of cities.” Ezrropean Econonric Rez~ieril
37: 293-298.
Krugman, P. R. (1993b). ”First nature, second nature, and metropolitan location.” jozrrrial
of Rq+)rinl Scierice 33: 129-144.

Krugman, P. R. (1997). ”Zipf’s law and city size.” Mimeograph, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology.
Krugman, P. R., and R. E. Livas. (1996). ”Trade policy and the third world metropolis.”
joir rrznl c!f Dez)eloptwrzt Ecor zotrzics 49(1): 137- 150.

Krugman, P. R., and A. Smith, eds. (1993). Enzyiricnl Stirdies qfStratc>gic Trade Policy. Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press.
Krugman, P. R., and A. J. Venables. (1995). ”Globalization and the inequality of nations.”
Qzinrterly joirrrzal qf Ecorzorrzics 1lO(4): 857-880.
Krugman, P. R., and A. J . Venables. (1997). ”Integration, specialization and adjustment.”
E ii ropcn r i Ecor iov i ic Rez~ierii40: 959-968.
Krugman, P. R., and A. J. Venables. (1997). “The seamless world: A spatial model of
international specialization.” Mimeograph, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cam-
bridge: MA.
Launhardt, W. (1885). Mathenratrschtp Begriidzing der Volksulirtse~zq~fslelzre.
                                                                            Leipzig, Ger-
many: B. G. Teubner.
Learner, E., and J. Levinsohn. (1996). In ”International trade theory: The evidence.” G.
Grossman and K. Rogoff, ed., Hnrz~fbookof Iriterrintiorznl Ecorzotizics, 3, Elsevier, Amsterdam,
pp. 1339-1394.
Lewin, R. (1992). Coitzylcxity: Life at the Edge of Chaos. New York: Macmillan.
Lorenz, E. (1994). The Essmcr c!f Chaos. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Losch, A. (1940). The Economics of Locatioiz. Jena, Germany: Fischer (English translation,
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1954).
Marshall, A. (1920). Pririciples qf Economics. London: Macmillan (8th ed.).
Marshall, J. U. (1989). TIic Strzrctzrrt7 uf Urbarz Systems. Toronto: University of Toronto
Press.
McCallum, J. (1995). ”National borders matter: Canada-U. S. regional trade patterns.”
Anieric-at1 Economic Rtwiew 8.5: 615-623.
Mills, E. S. (1967). “An aggregative model of resource allocation in a metropolitan area.”
Artrcrrcarz Ecorzorrzic R e k u 57: 197-210.
References                                                                                  355


Mori, T. (1997). “A modeling of megalopolis formation: the maturing of city systems.”
Journal of Urbaii Ecoizoniics 42: 133-157.
Murphy, R., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny. (1989). ”Industrialization and the big push.”
]oiirrznl of Political Ecoiionzy 97(5): 1003-1026.
Myrdal, G. (1957). Ecorzorizic Theory a d Under-dezvloped Rqioiis. London: Duckworth.
Nerlove, M. L., and E. Sadka. (1991). ”The von Thunen model of the dual economy.”
Joirriial of Ecoiioirzics 54: 97-123.
Nicolis, G., and I. Prigogine. (1989). Exploririg Complexity. New York: W. H. Freeman.
Ohlin, B. (1933). Iiiterregioizal arid International Trade. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
Porter, M. E. (1990). The Coirzpetitive Advatitage of Nntioiis. New York: Macmillan.
Pred, A. (1966). The Spatial Dyizaiiiics of U. S. Urbari-Iizrlusfrinl Grou~th.Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Prigogine, I., and I. Stengers. (1984). Order out of Clznos. New York: Bantam Books.
Puga, D. (1998). “The rise and fall of regional inequalities.” Ezrropcwz Ecoiioiizic Rmiew,
forthcoming.
Puga, D., and A. J. Venables. (1996). “The spread of industry; spatial agglomeration and
economic development.” ]otirrzal of the Japanese mid Iiiterrintioiinl Ecoiioiirics lO(4): 440-
464.
Rauch, J. E. (1996). ”Networks versus markets in international trade.” Discussion paper
no. 5617, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Reilly, W. J. (1931). The Lmo of Retail Gravitation. New York: Knickerbocker Press
Rosen, K. T., and M. Resnick. (1980). “The size distribution of cities: An examination of
the Pareto law and primacy.” Jourizal of Urbarz Ecorzoinics 8(2): 165-186.
Samuelson, P. A. (1952). “The transfer problem and transport costs: The terms of trade
when impediments are absent.” Ecoizoniic Jourrinl 62: 278-304.
Samuelson, P. A. (1971).”On the trail of conventional beliefs about the transfer problem.”
In J. Bhagwati, R. W. Jones, R. A. Mondell, J. Vanek, eds., Trndc, Bnlniice c?f Pnyniriits, nizd
Gro7uth. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Samuelson, P. A. (1983). ”Thunen at two hundred.” ]otrriinl (fEcoriortric Liternfirre 21:
1468- 1488.
Simon, H. (1955). ”On a class of skew distribution functions.” Biorizctriko 42: 425-440.
Smith, A., and A. J. Venables. (1988). ”Completing the internal market in the European
community: Some industry simulations.” Europeaii Ecoiioriric Reuieii? 32: 1501-1525
Tobin, J. (1955). “A dynamic aggregative model.” Jozrriiol cif Polificd Emroiizy 63103-
115.
Turing, A. (1952). “The chemical basis of morphogenesis.” Philosopliicsl Traizsnctiom (!f
the Royal Society of Loiidoti 237: 37-72.
Venables, A. J. (1996). ”Equilibrium locations of vertically linked industries.” Iiittwzn-
tioiial Ecoiiorizic Rmiew 37: 341-359.
356                                                                             References


Venables, A. J. (1998). ”Geography and specialisation: Industrial belts on a circular
plain.” In R. Baldwin, D. Cohen, A. Sapir, and A. J. Venables, eds., Regional Integration.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, forthcoming.
von Thunen, J. H. (1826).Der Isolierte Staat in Betiehung auflnndtschaft itrid Nationalokono-
mie. Hamburg (English translation by C. M. Wartenberg, uoti Thiirzen’s Isolated State, Ox-
ford: Pergamon Press, 1966).
Weber, A. (1909). Urber dori Starzdort der hzdustrien. Tubingen, Germany: J. C. B. Mohr.
Weibull, J. W. (1995).Ezdutionary Game Theory. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Zipf, G. (1949). Hriiiiaii Behazyior aiid the Priiiciple of Least Effort. New York: Addison-
Wesley.
                                                      Index




Ades, A. F., 330, 347                        in two-country model with intermediate
agglomeration                                  goods and growth, 269
 with agricultural transport costs, 111      in two-region core-periphery model,
 break and sustain points of, 32-41            61-62,65
 circumstances leading to, 31                in two-sector monocentric model, 134-
 in economies with concave PPFs, 294-           140
    295                                      in three-region core-periphery model,
 effect of centrifugal and centripetal         79-82
    forces on, 34-41, 346                    in multi-region racetrack model, 82-85
 frequency in racetrack model of compet-     trade costs of, 97-100
    itive industries, 313-317                in two-country model with intermediate
 influences in two-country model on, 245       goods, 256-259
 occurrences, 1                              in two-sector monocentric model with
 relation to labor mobility, 240               multiple industries, 184-191
 role of linkages in, 345                    unplanned competition in, 17
 to supplement von Thiinen model, 18         in von Thiinen model of land use, 16-
 in two-country, two-industry model             17
    with labor, 289, 292-293                Alonso, W., 17
 in two-country model with intermediate     Amiti, M., 285
    goods, 251-256,258-259                                                                 i
 in two-country model with intermediate     Bairoch, P., 111
    goods and growth, 268-269               base-multiplier analysis
 in two-sector core-periphery model, 70      bifurcations in model, 34
 in two-sector model with agricultural       equilibria in extension of model, 28-
    trade costs, 108-110                        31
  See also break point; sustain point        idea of, 27-28
agglomeration economies                     bifurcation
 spatial concentration in, 4                 in analysis of trade liberalization effect,
agricultural sector                             332-335
 with differentiated agricultural prod-      in base-multiplier model, 34
   ucts, 105-113                             in core-periphery model, 68, 75
 in Dixit-Stiglitz model, 45-49              creation of frontier cities with, 166
 in monocentric economy with                 diagram for a three-city system, 158-
   branching, 228-231                           159
 in nineteenth-century United States, 183    diagram with different levels of popula-
 in regional models, 11                         tion, 157-158
 in spatial model of urban system, 120-      in economic geography models, 34
    128                                      effect of transport costs on, 168-175
 358                                                                                   Index


bifurcation (cont.)                                effect on agglomeration, 346
  in evolution of spatial system with pop-         effect on spatial structure of the econ-
     ulation growth, 161-164                           omy, 345
  flow pattern with, 168-175                       of external economies, 23
  frontier cities created with, 193-203            in two-sector monocentric model, 133-
  in long-run evolution of urban spatial               135
     system, 193-203                            centripetal forces
  occurrences of, 321                              defined, 9
  pitchfork, 37-38, 192                            in discussion of bifurcation, 34-41
  role in specialization, 310                      effect on agglomeration, 346
  in structure of regional specialization,         effect on spatial structure of the econ-
     310                                              omy, 345
  in two-country model with intermediate          of external economies, 22-23
     goods, 251, 257-259                          in two-sector core-periphery model, 69-
  in two-country model with intermediate              71
     goods and growth, 268-269                    in two-sector monocentric model of sin-
   Set. also centrifugal forces; centripetal          gle city’s economy, 133-135
     forces; frontier cities; population        Christaller, W., 26-27, 199, 215
    growth                                      cities
bifurcation, tomahawk, 39-41                      adjustment dynamics of three-city case,
 conditions for, 160, 168-171                         175- 1 79
 transforms monocentric to tricentric sys-        agglomeration shadow of, 147
    tem, 168-175                                  conditions for emergence of new, 160-
Blaug, Mark, xi                                       161
branch point                                      conditions for transition from monocen-
 in monocentric economy, 231-233                      tric to tricentric system, 168-175
 as urban location, 227-228                       edge cities (Garreau), 21 -22
break point                                       emergence in relation to size of popula-
 of agglomeration, 32-41                             tion, 157- 158
 derivation in two-country model with             first-, second-, and third-order in
    intermediate goods, 260-261                      nineteenth-century US., 182-184
 explained, 10, 32                                formation of new, 154-160
 in two-country, two-industry with labor         higher- and lower-order, 181, 193
    model, 290                                    locations in spatial model of urban sys-
 in two-country model with intermediate              tem, 121-126
    goods, 251-253, 258                          manufacturing market share in itine-city
 in two-sector core-periphery model, 68,             equilibrium, 164-165
    71-75                                        market potential function and sus-
   SPP also equilibrium, symmetric; sus-             tainability of, 143-148
    tain point                                   monocentric city model, 17
Brulhart, M., 285                                as ports and hubs, 129-131
                                                 in possible pattern of urban spatial evo-
central-place system                                 lution, 233-235
 hierarchy of (Christaller), 26                  simulated history of formation of, 193-
 potential hierarchy of, 128                         203
 spatial system approaching, 164                 specialization in Henderson’s urban sys-
central-place theory                                 tem model, 20-21
 hierarchy of cities in, 128                        See also central-place system; city size;
 ideas and logic of, 26-27                           frontier cities
centrifugal forces                             city size
 defined, 9                                      in central place system, 164
 in discussion of bifurcation, 34-41
Index                                                                               359


 density of and elasticity of density of,     newly industrializing, 275-276
     219                                      two-country models, 241-261, 264-269,
 diseconomies of, 20, 218                        287-293
 distribution of cities by, 215-219          cusp
 Gibrat’s law of growth independent           at branch point, 228
     from size, 223-224                       can sustain urban concentration, 125
 in Henderson’s urban system model,           creation of, 124-125
     19-22, 218                               as discontinuity in derivative, 124
 power law of distribution of, 220-222        in market potential function of a city,
  from random growth, 221                        145
clusters of economic activity, 1
   Sec also industrial clusters              demand and supply
comparative advantage, 309                    in Dixit-Stiglitz model, 47-49, 55-58
competition                                   spatial model of urban system, 120-121
 allocation of crops with unplanned, 17       in two-country model with intermediate
 Dixit-Stiglitz model of monopolistic            goods, 242-243
    competition, 3, 6, 45-49                  in two-country model with intermediate
 in factors market, 293                          goods and growth, 264-265, 269
 imperfect, 5-6                              development phases
 in product market, 295                       in multicountry, multi-industry model
 unplanned, 17                                   with growth, 272-273
 in von Thunen model of land use, 16-        differentiation
    17                                        of agricultural products in two-sector
competitive advantage concept, 284               model, 105-113
concentration                                 in core-periphery model, 72-75
 industry, 138, 250                           in Dixit-Stiglitz model, 55-58
 sustainability in two-country, two-          in manufacturing sector of two-sector
    industry model with labor, 288               monocentric model, 181, 184-186
 sustaining urban, 125                        in multi-region racetrack model, 85-86
   See also population; spatial concentra-   distance
    tion                                      core-periphery model, 65-68
consumption                                   in Dixit-Stiglitz model, 49-50
 in discrete locations, 49-50                 effect on bifurcation, 168-171
 in Dixit-Stiglitz model, 46-49               in location of new cities, 154-167
core-periphery model                          in monocentric system, 186-191
 assessing sustainability of two-region,      in racetrack economy, 82-85
    69-71                                     related to market potential function,
 assumptions of two-region, 61-62                140-148
 focus of, 303                                relationship between trade volume and,
 statement of two-region model and ex-           98
    amples, 65-68                             three-city case, 175-179
 three-region, 79-82                          in Turing approach to racetrack econ-
core-periphery structure                         omy, 88-94
 conditions for emergence or breakup of,       See also location; transport costs; urban
    109-110                                      systems
 in two-sector model of agricultural         Dixit, A. K., 3
    trade costs, 102-104                     Dixit-Stiglitz model of monopolistic com-
countries                                       petition, 6-7, 45-59, 241
 industrial structure of fully industrial-   Dobkins, L. H., 216
    ized, 276                                dynamics
 multicountry, multi-industry models,         ad hoc, 7-8
    271-278, 298-303                          adjustment, 17s-179
360                                                                               Index


dynamics (cont.)                               related to tastes, technology, and trans-
 modeling of newly emerging cities, 153          portation, 88-91
 replicator, 8                                 relationship between frequency of fluc-
 role of, 32                                      tuation and, 92-93
 of three-region economic geography            in Turing approach to racetrack econ-
   model, 79-82                                  omy model, 87, 313
                                             Ellison, G., 285
economic geography                           Engel, C., 239
 bifurcations in models of, 34               equilibria, stable and unstable. See equi-
  defining issue of, 4                           librium, symmetric.
  modeling in, 25                            equilibrium
  monocentric, 135, 141, 145-147              determinants in core-periphery model,
  new, 3-5                                       63-65
 policy issues, 283                           determinants in von Thunen model of
 population and economic activity re-            land use, 137-140
    lated to, 1-2                             equilibria differences related to size of
  research on, 2                                 population, 157-158
  using computer-assisted thinking, 8         equilibria in base-multiplier model, 29-
economic geography model                         31
 determining instantaneous equilibrium        equilibria structure in two-country
    in, 63-65                                    model with intermediate goods, 245-
 dynamics of three-region, 79-82                 251,253-254
 two-region, 61 -62                           long-run, 317-318
economies of scale                            monocentric geography as, 142-143
 interaction with market size, 31-32          punctuated, 319-321
 manufacturing, 50-52                         sustainability of monocentric, 146-147,
economy, the                                     153
 activities in regions, 27                    in two-country, multi-industry model,
 base-multiplier analysis of regional, 27-       298-303
    32                                        in two-sector monocentric model, 140-
 branching in monocentric, 228-231               148
 core-periphery model of, 65-68               two-sector monocentric model with mul-
 effect of centripetal and centrifugal           tiple industries, 185-203
    forces on, 345                            in von Thunen model of land rent, 16-
 monocentric, two-sector model of, 134-          17
    140, 152-153                             equilibrium, fla t-earth
 racetrack economy model, 1 1, 82-85,         divergence in racetrack model from,
    88-91, 310-317                               86-94
 self-organization of hierarchical system     multi-region racetrack model, 84-86
    in, 191-203                               in racetrack model with competitive in-
 in spatial Dixit-Stiglitz model, 45-59          dustries, 313-319
 spatial evolution of, 233-235                  Sec also differentiation; fluctuations
 spatial unevenness of, 1-2                  equilibrium, symmetric
 of von Thunen model, 136                     in adjustment dynamics of three-city
   Scp also external economies                   case, 175-179
eigenfunc tion                                in analysis of industrial clustering with
 of dynamic system, 86-87                        external trade, 337-338
 in racetrack model with competitive in-      in analysis of trade liberalization effect,
    dustries, 313                                332-335
eigenvalues                                   breaking in industrial clustering analy-
 of flat earth equilibrium of competitive        sis, 341-343
    industries, 313-316
Index                                                                                36 1


   breaking in two-sector core-periphery         in racetrack model with competitive in-
      model, 76-77                                  dustries, 31 1
   breaking in two-sector model with agri-       in regional models, xii
      culture product differentiation, 111-      underlying primary, 293
      113                                          See also labor force
   breaking of, 304-305                        firms
   in core-periphery model, 66-68, 71-7.5        linkages in two-country model with in-
   derivation of break point in two-                termediate goods, 241-243
      country model, 260-261                     in racetrack economy with competitive
   differentiating in Dixit-Stiglitz model          industries, 311
      around, 5.5-58                           flow pattern
  double symmetry in two-country, two-           of agricultural goods in hierarchy of
      industry with labor model, 290                cities, 205
  effect of no-black-hole condition on, 74-      of agricultural goods with bifurcation,
      75                                            168-175
  influence of centrifugal and centripetal    fluctuations
     forces on, 34-41                           defined, 88
  sustain and break points in two-country       effect of frequency on growth rate, 88-
     model, 248, 251-253                            92
  in three-region core-periphery model,         growth rate of, 88-91
     80-82                                      in multi-region racetrack model, 85-94
  in two-country, two-industry model            preferred frequency, 91-94
     with labor, 287-288                        relationship of frequency to eigeniralue,
  in two-country model with intermediate            92-93
     goods, 249-252, 257-258                  frontier cities
  in two-sector core-periphery model, 66-       creation with bifurcation, 166
     67, 71-75                                  in long-run evolution of urban spatial
  in two-sector model of agricultural              system, 193-203
     trade costs, 103-104                       market share in nine-city equilibrium,
    See also bifurcation; break point; sus-         164- 165
     tain point                                 in nineteenth-century United States,
expenditures                                       182-184
 in multicountry, multi-industry model,       Fujita, M., 22-23, 209, 210
     279                                      future work, 345
 in two-country, two-industry with labor        empirical work, 347
     model, 287-289                             quantification, 347-348
 in two-country model with intermediate         welfare implications, 348-349
     goods and growth, 265-266
external economies                            Gabaix, X., 224
 centripetal and centrifugal forces of, 22-   Garreau, J., 21
     23                                       Gibrat’s law, 223-224
 concept of (Marshall), 18-19                 Glaeser, E. L., 285, 330, 347
 of Henderson’s urban system model, 20        gravity models, 98
 in particular industries, 218                Grossman, G. M., xi, 4

factors of production                         Hanson, G., 329-330, 347
 competition in markets for, 293              Harris, C., 5, 33
 mobility as centripetal force, 134           Heckscher-Ohlin model, 293-294
 prices in two-country, two-industry          Helliwell, J., 239-240
   model, 298                                 Helpman, Elhanan, xi, 4
 in production possibility frontier, 293-     Henderson, J. V., 3, 19-21, 31, 218
   294
362                                                                                Index


hierarchical principle (Christaller), 199,   Krugman, P. A., xi, 4, 209, 210, 224, 253,
   2131113                                      284, 330, 348
home market effect, 55-58
Hoover, E. M., 18                             labor force
Hotel!ing, H., 41111                            barriers to mobility of, 240
                                                in Dixit-Stiglitz model of, 50-55
Ijiri, Y., 219                                  mobility between clustered industries,
income                                            338-340
  in core-periphery model, 63-65, 69-71         mobility in analysis of trade liberaliza-
  in Dixit-Stiglitz model, 46-49, 54               tion effect, 332-335
  in extension of von Thunen model of           mobility in two-region core-periphery
     land use, 141                                model, 62, 65-67
  in two-sector model of agricultural           mobility in two-sector model of agricul-
     trade costs, 106                             tural trade costs, 102-104
industrial clusters                             in model of single-city economy, 134
  evidence for, 284-285                        spatial model of urban system, 120-121
  influences on European and American,         supply in two-country model with inter-
     290                                          mediate goods, 243, 256
  labor force mobility among, 338-340           technical efficiency in two-country
  using two-sector model of industrial            model with growth and intermediate
    specialization, 335-338                       goods, 264-265, 267-269
industrialization process                      in two-country, two industry model
 in multicountry, multi-industry model            with labor, 285-287
    with growth, 270-278                       in two-sector moncentric model, 137-
 in world economy, 277                            140
industries                                       See also wages, agriculture; wages,
 concentration in multicountry, multi-            manufacturing
    industry model with growth, 271, 273     labor market
 conditions for spinning out of city, 189-     clearing in model of city with multiple
    191, 207-212                                  industries, 185
 market potential function in city with        in two-country, two-industry model
    multiple industries, 186-187                  with labor, 285-293
 in multicountry, multi-industry model       land as centrifugal force, 134
    with growth, 271-274                     land rent
 in Simon’s urban growth model, 220            with cyclical change in evolutionary pro-
 in two-country, multi-industry model,            cess of spatial system, 166-167
    298-303                                    in evolution of hierarchical urban sys-
 in two-country, two-industry model               tem, 205-206
    with labor, 285-286                        in evolving spatial system with popula-
 in two-sector monocentric model with             tion growth, 161-164
    multiple industries, 181, 184-191          in von Thiinen model of land use, 16-
   Sec. also industrial clusters                  17, 136-137
input-output matrix, two-country, two-       land use
    industry model with labor, 286             insights of urban economics to, 23
Ioannides, Y. M., 216                          von Thiinen model of, 15-18, 22, 26
Isard, Walter, 25, 33                        Learner, E., 98
                                             Levinsohn, J., 98
Jones, R. W., 311                            linkages, backward and forward, 5, 10
                                               in analysis of trade liberalization effect,
Kenen, Peter, 293                                 332-335
Kim, S., 284-285                               in circular logic of agglomeration, 345
knowledge spillovers (Marshall), 4-5           of development theory, 5
Index                                                                                 363


  effect on trade costs in core-periphery          in spatial model of urban system, 120-
     structure, 102                                   128
  in extension of von Thunen model of              in three-region core-periphery model,
     land use, 142                                    79-82
  leading to specialization, 240                   in two-country, two-industry model
  in multicountry, multi-industry model               with labor, 285
     with growth, 273-277                          in two-country model with intermediate
  role in economic geography, 5                       goods and growth, 266-269
  role in industrial concentration, 259            in two-region core-periphery model,
  supporting core-periphery pattern, 69-              61-62,69-71
     71                                           in two-sector monocentric model, 1.W-
  in two-country, two-industry model                  140
     with labor, 286, 289                           See also market share, manufacture
  in two-country model with intermediate        market potential
     goods, 241 -242,245,249,254-256,             analysis, 32-33
     258-259                                      in evolution of spatial system with pop-
  in two-country model with intermediate              ulation growth, 161-164
     goods and growth, 267-268, 274-277           in traditional economic geography, 118-
 in two-sector core-periphery model, 63-              149
    64,67, 69-70                                market potential function
 in two-sector monocentric model, 135             derivation in extension of von Thiinen
Livas, R. E., 330                                    model of land use, 140-141
locations                                         with different population sizes, 142-
 branch point as urban location, 227                  143, 151
 discrete multiple, 49-50                         for dynamic modeling of emerging new
 locational forces in two-country model              cities, 153
    with intermediate goods, 243-245              of each industry in model of city with
 in racetrack economy, 11                            multiple industries, 186-187
 size in analysis of trade liberalization ef-     limit, 149
    fect, 332-335                                 manufacturing in extension of von
 spatial model of urban system, 120-126              Thiinen model of land use, 141
 two locations in Dixit-Stiglitz model,          measurement using, 32-33
    55-58                                         in model of city with multiple indus-
   See also distance; transport costs                tries, 185-186
location theory, 26                               relation of market potential of tradi-
   S m also central-place theory                     tional economic geography to, 148-
LGsch, A., 26-27                                     149
                                                markets
manufacturing sector                             home market effect in Dixit-Stiglitz
 in Dixit-Stiglitz model, 45-49                      model, 55-58
 evolution with many locations, 84-85            labor market, 185
 evolution with twelve locations allo-           in Marshall's analysis, 4-5
   cated randomly, 83-84                         producer behavior related to market
in hierarchical urban system, 181                    size, 50-52
 model of city with multiple industries,         product market competition, 245
    185-186                                     market share, manufacture
 in monocentric economy with                     in fifteen-city equilibrium, 201-203
   branching, 228-231                            in multicountry, multi-industry model
in multi-region racetrack model, 82-88               with growth, 271-272
in regional models, 11                           in nine-city equilibrium, 164-165
share of primary factor inputs, 293              in two-country model with intermediate
spatial analysis, 85-87                              goods and growth, 269
364                                                                                 Index


Marshal], Alfred                              Porter, M. E., 284
 external economies concept, 18-19            ports as urban centers, 129-131
 idea of knowledge spillovers, 4-5            power laws
Mills, E. S., 19                               describing city size distribution, 216-
monocentric structure, sustainable, 145           217
Mori, T., 209, 210                             from percolation models, 224
                                               in Simon’s urban growth model, 222-
no-black-hole condition                           223
 assumption of, 58-59, 92, 147                 on size of U.S. cities, 223
 effect of hold or failure of, 74-75             See also city size; rank-size rule; Zipf‘s
 in racetrack model with competitive in-          law
    dustries, 315                             PPF. See production possibility frontier
 in sustainabili ty of monocentric equilib-       (PPF).
   rium, 146-147                              Pred, A., 5, 28, 30, 31
 in two-country, two-industry with labor      price index
   model, 289                                  in core-periphery model, 63
 in two-country model with intermediate        in Dixit-Stiglitz model, 47-48, 52-53,
   goods, 249, 251                                55-58
 in two-sector core-periphery model, 70        in multicountry, multi-industry model,
 in von Thiinen model of land use, 139            278
                                               in two-country, two-model with labor
Ogawa, H., 22-23                                  model, 286
Ohlin, Bertil, 239                             in two-country model with intermediate
                                                  goods, 242-243, 250
percolation theory, 224                       price index, manufacturing
population                                     in extension of von Thiinen model of
 in analysis of industrial clustering with        land use, 141
    external trade, 335-338                    in spatial version of Dixit-Stiglitz
 bifurcation with different levels of, 157-       model, 46-51
    158                                        in von Thiinen model of land use, 137
 distribution of, 1                           prices
 related to market potential function,         elasticity in two-country model with in-
    140- 148                                      termediate goods, 249
 relation of size to market potential func-    of manufactured goods in von Thiinen
    tion, 142-143, 152-154                        model of land use, 137
 in von Thiinen model, 134-140                 price ratio in production possibility fron-
population growth                                 tier, 293-295
 bifurcation and emergence of cities          prices, agricultural products
    with, 157-167                              in evolution of hierarchical urban sys-
 conditions for tomahawk bifurcation              tem, 206-207
    with, 160, 168-171                         in von Thiinen model of land use, 136-
 effect on emergence of new cities, 151-          137
    152                                       production
 evolution of urban systems with, 161-         geographic structure of, 259
    164                                        input-output structure, 241
 implies transition from monocentric to       production function
    tricentric system, 168- 175                of agriculture in two-country model
 relation to city formation, 126-128              with intermediate goods, 244-245,
 in Simon’s urban growth model, 219-              256-259
    222                                        of manufacturing in two-country model,
 in United States during nineteenth cen-          241-242
    tury, 182-183
 Index                                                                                365


 production possibility frontier (PPF),       space, continuous
    293-294                                     restatement of racetrack economy
  concave, 294-295                                 model in, 88-91
  for creation of primary factor inputs,        Turing approach, 85-88
    293-294                                   spatial concentration
  derivation from Heckscher-Ohlin type          centripetal and centrifugal forces affect-
    model, 306                                     ing, 9
  derived from Ricardo-Viner model, 31 1        increasing returns to, 4
  product market competition, 245               linkage-based, 5
                                                modeling of, 4-5
 racetrack economy, 11                          role of linkages in creating and sus-
 racetrack economy model                           taining, 10
   flat earth equilibrium in, 313-317           self-reinforcement of, 7
   restated in continuous space, 88-91           See also centrifugal forces; centripetal
   structures emerging from experiments,           forces
      82-85                                   spatial structure
   Turing approach applied to, 88-91            centrifugal and centripetal forces in cre-
   with two competitive industries, 310-           ation of, 193-203
      31 1                                      von Thunen monocentric, 136
    See also equilibrium, flat-earth             See also urban systems
rank-size rule                               specialization
   in countries with lower population           bifurcation in structure of regional,
     growth, 223                                  310
  predictions of urban theory related to,       of cities in Henderson’s urban system
     217-219                                      model, 20-21
  random growth as explanation for, 219-       emergent structure of, 310
     225                                       international, 240
Rauch, J. E., 97-98                            patterns in two-country model with in-
regional models, xii, 11                          termediate goods, 245-251
regional science                             Stiglitz, J. E., 3
  of Isard, 25                               sustain condition
  limitations of, 33-34                        in two-country, two-industry with labor
  modern, 25                                      model, 289
regions                                        in two-country model with intermediate
  industry specialization in, 310                 goods and growth, 266-268
  multi-region racetrack model, 11, 82-94,   sustain point
     321                                       of agglomeration, 32-41
  three-region core-periphery model, 79-       explained, 10, 32
     82                                        in two-country model with intermediate
  two- and three-region economic geogra-          goods, 248,252-253
     phy model, 61-62,79-82                   in two-sector core-periphery model, 68-
  two-region core-periphery model, 61-            75
     62, 64-75
Resnick, M., 216                             technical progress
Rogers, J. H., 239                             in two-country model with growth and
Rosen, K. T., 216                                intermediate goods, 264-265
                                             Torstensson, J., 285
Samuelson, P. A., 7, 49, 311                 trade, international
Scheinkman, J., 347                           comparative advantage in, 309
Shleifer, A., 347                             defined, 12
Simon, Herbert, 219                           liberalization, 332-335
Smith, A., 348                                limits to, 239
366                                                                               Index


trade, international (cont.)                urban systems
  relationship between distance and vol-     conditions for creation of frontier cities
     ume of, 98                                 in, 166
trade costs                                  development of, 110-111
  agriculture, 97-100                        evolutionary process, 166-167
  equilibria in two-country, two-industry    evolution of U.S. nineteenth century,
     model, 292                                 182-1 83
  model of agricultural sector, 99-100       evolution with population growth, 161-
  related to concave PPF, 295                   164
  in two-country, two-industry with labor    model of economy as (Henderson), 19-
     model, 291-293                            21, 218, 346
  in two-country model with intermediate     patterns of evolution, 233-235
    goods and growth, 267                    ports and transportation hubs as centers
   Stv nlso transport costs                     in, 129-131
trade-offs, static, 219                      process of adjustment of population in,
transportation hubs                             152-1 53
  impact on market potential function,        S w also cities; distance; frontier cities;
    231-233                                    locations; regions
 as urban centers, 129-131                  urban systems, hierarchical
transport costs                              higher- and lower-order cities in, 181,
  as centripetal force, 134                     193
  in Dixit-Stiglitz model, 49-50             long-run evolution of, 193-203
 effect of changes among countries in,       role of manufacturing sector in evolu-
    259                                        tion of, 181
 iceberg form of, 7, 49, 135                 self-organization toward, 191-203
  in multi-region racetrack model, 82-85,   urban theory
    92-93                                    external economies concept in, 18
 spatial model of urban system, 121-126      as predictor of rank-size rule, 217-219
 in two-region core-periphery model, 62,     von Thunen model of land use, 15-18,
    67-68, 70-71                               22
 in three-region core-periphery model,
    79-82                                   Venables, A. J., 253
 in von Thiinen model of land use, 16       von Thiinen, J. H., 15-16, 49, 133
transport costs, agricultural               von Thunen model of land use, 3, 11,
 bifurcation with high cost of, 168-175        15-18, 22, 26, 133, 346
 effect on agglomeration, 111
 effect on symmetric equilibrium, 110-      wages
    111                                      in multicountry, multi-industry model
 in two-sector model of agricultural            with growth, 272-273
    trade costs, 99-100                      in two-country, two-industry model
Turing, Alan, 11, 79, 85-88                     with labor, 286-287, 290
Turing analysis                              in two-country model with intermediate
 of emergent structure, 310                     goods, 243-245
 multi-region racetrack economy using,       in two-sector monocentric model, 143-
    11, 85-94, 321                              148
                                             wage equation, 52-53
urban economics                             wages, agriculture
 limits to traditional, 23                   in evolution of hierarchical urban sys-
 in mainstream economics, 25                    tem, 206-207
   Sre also urban systems; von Thunen        in two-country model with intermediate
    model of land use                           goods, 245-246, 256-258
urban growth model (Simon), 219-222          in von Thunen model of land use, 137
Index                                      367


wages, manufacturing
 in Dixit-Stiglitz model, 51-55
 in evolution of hierarchical urban sys-
    tem, 207
 in two-country model with intermediate
    goods and growth, 266-269
wages, nominal and real
 in two-country model with intermediate
    goods, 253-256, 258
 in two-region core-periphery model, 62,
    64, 66-67, 70-75
Weber, Alfred, 26, 41nl
welfare measures
 trends in long-run evolution of urban
    spatial system, 203-204

Zipf, George, 217
Zipf's law, 217, 223-224
