[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: working-paper/B24-hornbeck-michaels-rauch-2024-identifying-agglomeration-shadows-long-run-evidence-from-ancient-ports-10.2139-ssrn.4889236.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Title:           CESifo Working Paper no. 11188
Subject:         Identifying Agglomeration Shadows: Long-Run Evidence from Ancient Ports
Keywords:        CESifo Working Paper no. 11188
agglomeration shadow, urban hierarchy, new economic geography
Author:          Richard.Hornbeck, Guy.Michaels, Ferdinand.Rauch
Creator:         Acrobat PDFMaker 11 für Word
Producer:        Adobe PDF Library 11.0
CreationDate:    Tue Jul  2 16:20:01 2024 WIB
ModDate:         Wed Jul  3 16:30:15 2024 WIB
Custom Metadata: yes
Metadata Stream: yes
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            AcroForm
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           69
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       595.38 x 841.98 pts (A4)
Page rot:        0
File size:       8494073 bytes
Optimized:       no
PDF version:     1.6
[Extracted Text]
                                                                             11188
                                                                              2024
                                                                               June 2024




Identifying Agglomeration
Shadows: Long-Run Evidence
from Ancient Ports
Richard Hornbeck, Guy Michaels, Ferdinand Rauch




           Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Impressum:

CESifo Working Papers
ISSN 2364-1428 (electronic version)
Publisher and distributor: Munich Society for the Promotion of Economic Research - CESifo
GmbH
The international platform of Ludwigs-Maximilians University’s Center for Economic Studies
and the ifo Institute
Poschingerstr. 5, 81679 Munich, Germany
Telephone +49 (0)89 2180-2740, Telefax +49 (0)89 2180-17845, email office@cesifo.de
Editor: Clemens Fuest
https://www.cesifo.org/en/wp
An electronic version of the paper may be downloaded
· from the SSRN website:       www.SSRN.com
· from the RePEc website:      www.RePEc.org
· from the CESifo website:     https://www.cesifo.org/en/wp




                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
                                                                 CESifo Working Paper No. 11188




            Identifying Agglomeration Shadows:
           Long-Run Evidence from Ancient Ports

                                           Abstract

We examine “agglomeration shadows” that emerge around large cities, which discourage some
economic activities in nearby areas. Identifying agglomeration shadows is complicated, however,
by endogenous city formation and \wave interference" that we show in simulations. We use the
locations of ancient ports near the Mediterranean, which seeded modern cities, to estimate
agglomeration shadows cast on nearby areas. We find that empirically, as in the simulations,
detectable agglomeration shadows emerge for large cities around ancient ports. These patterns
extend to modern city locations more generally, and illustrate how encouraging growth in
particular places can discourage growth of nearby areas.
JEL-Codes: R120, N900.
Keywords: agglomeration shadow, urban hierarchy, new economic geography.



           Richard Hornbeck                                       Guy Michaels
     University of Chicago / IL / USA                London School of Economics and Political
  Richard.Hornbeck@uchicagobooth.edu                    Science, London / United Kingdom
                                                              g.michaels@lse.ac.uk

                                       Ferdinand Rauch
                                   University of Heidelberg
                            ferdinand.rauch@awi.uni-heidelberg.de

June 2024
For helpful comments and suggestions, we thank many colleagues and seminar and conference
participants at Bergamo, Berlin, Bern, Bristol, BU, CEU, Census, Dartmouth, FRB-Philadelphia,
GEA, Georgetown, Harvard, Humboldt, Konstanz, LSE, NUS, Ottawa, Oxford, PSE, RES,
UChicago, UEA, Warwick, Wash U, Yale, and York. In particular, we thank Amir Jina for early
conversations, along with Jeffrey Lin and Tomoya Mori. For helpful discussant comments, we
thank Arieda Muço and Kohei Takeda. We thank Arthur de Graauw for very helpful advice on
using his data on ancient port locations. For excellent research assistance, we thank Sam Abers,
Olivia Bordeu Gazmuri, Loughlan O’Doherty, Georgios Tzortzis, Natalie Yang, and the team at
Digital Divide Data. This research was funded in part by the Initiative on Global Markets at the
University of Chicago Booth School of Business, the Neubauer Family Faculty Fellowship, and
the ESRC’s Centre for Economic Performance.




                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
    Cities benefit from agglomeration spillovers that raise productivity but may also cast
“agglomeration shadows” that discourage some economic activities in surrounding areas.
City growth can increase population density in nearby areas as cities expand outward from
their historical centers, but the broader economic gains may be tempered if nearby areas are
relegated to second-tier status in an urban hierarchy. Given sizeable urban-rural differences
in productivity, wages, and housing costs, spatial inequality is amplified if encouraging city
growth in particular areas discourages city growth in nearby areas.
    There have long been models of urban hierarchies (Jefferson, 1939), with larger cities
spaced out and interspersed with smaller cities (Christaller, 1933; Lösch, 1940). The New
Economic Geography literature modeled how such a system of cities can emerge (Fujita and
Krugman, 1995; Fujita, Krugman, and Mori, 1999; Fujita, Krugman, and Venables, 1999).
Fujita, Krugman, and Mori (1999) start with a central city, in which firms cluster to benefit
from agglomeration forces and increasing returns to scale. As population grows, new cities
emerge to serve an agricultural hinterland. While some small cities may emerge closer to the
central city, larger cities only develop further away because they face strong competition from
the central city without benefiting from its agglomeration forces. The central city thereby
casts a shadow, discouraging some economic activity nearby.
    While agglomeration shadows may be important in shaping the spatial distribution of
economic activity, it is challenging to identify these shadows for two main reasons. First,
cities grow in particular places, endogenously, in ways that both reflect and influence the
potential growth of nearby cities. In empirical settings, there is generally not an exogenously-
fixed starting central city from which to consider the causal impacts on surrounding areas.
Second, we use the model from Fujita, Krugman, and Mori (1999) to show in simulations
that a form of “wave interference” emerges when averaging across the surroundings of many
central cities. This wave interference arises because small differences across urban networks
make their spatial patterns asynchronous, which can obscure the alternating empty spaces
and cities (especially for smaller cities that are often not spaced as far apart).
    To overcome the reflective endogeneity in city growth, we study shadows cast by cities
“seeded” at 4,263 ancient port locations that surrounded the Mediterranean, Black Sea, Red
Sea, and nearby coastal areas. We find that ancient port locations are more likely to have
grown modern cities than geographically-similar locations, even when there are no longer
natural harbors in the ancient port locations to precisely pin down modern city locations.
We then estimate the probability that modern cities emerged near the ancient port locations,
which reflects the presence of agglomeration shadows from cities seeded at those ancient port
locations. The identifying assumption is that ancient ports are not otherwise associated with
city formation in surrounding areas, aside from encouraging city growth in that port location.


                                                 1

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Ancient ports may even have direct effects on modern activity in those port locations, but
our focus is identifying impacts on surrounding areas.
    We overcome the challenge of “wave interference” in two ways. First, we focus on ag-
glomeration shadows in large city locations, which are less obscured by wave interference
in model simulations because larger cities are rarer. Second, we contrast places where a
natural harbor has survived, pinning down economic activity more precisely to the ancient
port locations, to locations where a harbor has disappeared.
    The empirical analysis uses population data for 1km-by-1km grid cells (CIESIN, 2018),
which cover 2.3 million square km within 200km of an ancient port and within 50km of the
coast. We examine the spatial distribution of population density in grid cells around ancient
port locations, controlling for grid cells’ distance to the coast and nearest river, as well as
other “first nature” geographic features that may affect city formation (e.g., ruggedness,
temperature, precipitation). We also report estimates that control for endogenous features
of the ancient era, such as distance to Roman roads or proximity to ancient cities.
    We first estimate that grid cells with ancient ports have higher modern population density,
on average, and are more likely to have become urban areas or cities than geographically
similar grid cells. Grid cells with ancient ports are 12 percentage points more likely to have
urban population density (ln density > 6) and 1.7 percentage points more likely to have city
population density (ln density > 9), whereas 7.1% of sample grid cells have urban density
and 0.2% have city density.
    We estimate that average population density declines monotonically in distance from the
ancient port locations. Ancient ports’ impact on log population density extends beyond
city boundaries and at 50km is roughly one-fourth the impact at the ancient port location.
These impacts are similar – smaller, but still substantial – around ancient port locations that
have since lost their natural harbor. These estimates suggest path dependence in economic
activity, not only in particular locations with obsolete geographic advantages but also in
ways that extend to surrounding locations.1
    We then explore the existence of “agglomeration shadows” around these ancient port
locations, which are detectable in our simulations at higher thresholds of population density.
We find that urban activity (ln density > 6) declines monotonically in distance from the
ancient ports with harbors, whereas city activity (ln density > 9) declines more quickly
out to 20km and then increases up to 40km. This estimated agglomeration shadow in city
formation, at 10-30km from ancient port locations, is similar to the distance of a typical
   1
    We focus on the presence of a natural harbor in modern satellite images, setting aside the existence of
modern human-made harbors, which are potentially endogenous to local economic demand. Our estimates
are also not sensitive to omitting a small number of cases with known ancient investments in open-water
ports.


                                                    2

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
day’s travel for pack animals or carts in the ancient world (Scheidel, 2015).
    Consistent with the model’s prediction on agglomeration shadows, the likelihood of find-
ing city density follows a distinctive wave pattern around the locations of ancient ports whose
natural harbors survived and pinned down the location of their seeded city. Agglomeration
shadows are more obscured around ancient ports that lost their harbors, for which there is
more wave interference. In contrast to the wave pattern for city densities, we observe mono-
centric declines in urban activity that are similar to classic models of monocentric cities
(Alonso, 1964; Mills, 1967; Muth, 1969), but are also consistent with “wave interference”
from a combination of positive and negative spatial impacts at different distances.
    The agglomeration shadows in city activity appear to reflect general city-to-city crowd-
out, rather than direct competition between ports themselves. We estimate that ancient
port locations are not more likely to have modern port structures when nearby ancient port
locations have lost their harbors (and thereby have less port activity). By contrast, these
ancient port locations do appear to be in competition for more general economic activity:
ancient port locations have higher population density, urban activity, and city activity when
nearby ancient port locations have lost their harbors (and thereby have less general economic
activity).
    We conclude by examining the spatial distribution of all modern cities in our sample
region, where we find indications of agglomeration shadows more generally. We calculate
the distance from each modern city to the nearest modern city (from GHS-UCDB 2019
data), and we plot the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of distances. We compare
this observed CDF to the distribution of CDFs for minimum distances between randomly
located cities, where these random locations are selected in simulations using probability
weights to reflect geographic characteristics that predict city formation. Consistent with
the existence of agglomeration shadows in the modern spatial equilibrium, we observe fewer
large cities (> 500,000 people) whose nearest large city is within 40km. We then observe
more large cities than expected from 40km to 60km.
    Our main contribution is to use the historical influence of ancient port locations to
demonstrate causal negative “agglomeration shadows” that are consistent with longstand-
ing theory (Christaller, 1933; Lösch, 1940; Fujita, Krugman, and Mori, 1999), which echoes
the use of establishment openings to demonstrate causal positive “agglomeration spillovers”
(Greenstone, Hornbeck, and Moretti, 2010; Bloom et al., 2019; Giroud et al., 2021), which
also follows a long intellectual tradition (Marshall, 1890; Ellison and Glaeser, 1997; Glaeser
and Gottlieb, 2009). Our estimates draw on an empirical literature documenting local path
dependence (Bleakley and Lin, 2012; Michaels and Rauch, 2018), and we extend this lit-
erature to consider path dependence in spatial relationships beyond those locations. We


                                                 3

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
show that these resulting agglomeration shadows are obscured by a pattern of “wave inter-
ference,” which we document using simulations that extend the model in Fujita, Krugman,
and Mori (1999). Identifying agglomeration shadows is also complicated by classic chal-
lenges to causal inferences from endogenous city formation. The locations of ancient ports,
and variation in the survival of natural harbors, provide empirical traction to estimate the
presence of agglomeration shadows. Our main departures from existing empirical research
on agglomeration shadows are to (1) use historical determinants of starting city locations
for identification, and (2) connect our empirical tests more closely to theoretical predictions
from simulations based on Fujita, Krugman, and Mori (1999).
    When cities cast shadows, local economic growth can discourage some nearby activities
and encourage them further away. The existence of agglomeration shadows implies broader
impacts of place-based policies. Similar types of agglomeration shadows may also arise in
access to specific services at different locations, such as spatial differences in healthcare access
(Finkelstein, Gentzkow, and Williams, 2021; Dingel et al., 2023) or food deserts (Cummins
and Macintyre, 2002). We focus on identifying how major cities affect nearby places, using
the locations of ancient ports to gain empirical traction in identifying forces long hypothesized
but relatively overlooked in the recent focus on identifying positive agglomeration spillovers.
    Section I discusses related literature, simulations of agglomeration shadow forces in the
model of Fujita, Krugman, and Mori (1999), and implications for empirical analysis of ag-
glomeration shadows using ancient ports. Section II introduces the data, with more details
in Appendix A, and Section III describes our estimating equations. Section IV reports our
estimates using ancient port locations, and Section V analyzes agglomeration shadows among
modern cities more generally. Section VI concludes.
I   Related Literature and Model Simulations
I.A   Agglomeration Spillovers and Agglomeration Shadows
Economic activity is spatially concentrated, partly because of natural advantages to partic-
ular locations but also because proximity to other economic activity increases productivity
due to “agglomeration spillovers.” Manufacturing industries, for example, are more spa-
tially concentrated than can be explained by natural advantages or random chance (Ellison
and Glaeser, 1997, 1999; Duranton and Overman, 2005; Ellison, Glaeser, and Kerr, 2010;
Mori and Smith, 2015). Indeed, the opening of large manufacturing establishments increases
the productivity of nearby incumbent establishments (Greenstone, Hornbeck, and Moretti,
2010). These direct productivity benefits do not extend to further geographic areas but do
spread to further establishments owned by those incumbent firms (Giroud et al., 2021) in
part through changes in management practices (Bloom et al., 2019).


                                                  4

                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
    Cities are not just points in space, representing central business districts where these
positive agglomeration spillovers may be strongest. In classic models of “monocentric cities,”
population density and land prices are highest at the city center and decrease in distance
from this center (von Thünen, 1826; Alonso, 1964; Mills, 1967; Muth, 1969; Duranton and
Puga, 2004). This empirical pattern is common, though there are deviations and extended
models consider “polycentric cities” (Ahlfeldt and Wendland, 2013; Ahlfeldt et al., 2015).
The broader economy then includes a distribution of cities of different sizes (Henderson,
1974; Gabaix, 1999), with a greater range of economic activities in larger cities (Davis and
Dingel, 2020).
    Strong agglomeration forces raise the prospect of “agglomeration shadows,” whereby
concentrated economic activity in cities actively discourages some nearby economic activities.
In early models of urban hierarchies (Christaller, 1933; Lösch, 1940), a featureless plain is
evenly populated by farmers and is served by a hexagonal lattice of “central places” in a
hierarchy: larger cities are spaced far apart, producing a broad range of urban goods and
services, and smaller cities fill-in intermediate areas to offer a narrower range of goods and
services.
    The tension between congestion and dispersion forces is captured by models in the New
Economic Geography literature, which provide micro-foundations that rationalize the emer-
gence of urban hierarchies through a decentralized process (e.g., Fujita and Krugman 1995;
Fujita, Krugman, and Mori 1999; Fujita, Krugman, and Venables 1999; Fujita and Mori
2005; Mori et al. 2023).2 These models predict that cities create agglomeration shadows,
discouraging city formation in surrounding areas, but the length of these shadows varies by
cities’ sizes and the diversity of their economic activity. Large cities are less likely to form
near other large cities in these models, but smaller cities may still form closer to large cities.
I.B    Agglomeration Shadow Appearance in Simulations
We build on the model of Fujita, Krugman, and Mori (1999), “FKM model,” to simulate
how agglomeration shadows appear when estimating average impacts across many geographic
areas.
    The FKM model describes a one-dimensional economy, with a fixed initial city and other
locations indexed by distance r from that initial city. There are two sectors in the model,
“manufacturing” and “agriculture.” Within manufacturing, there are three industries that
each produce a continuum of differentiated goods using labor and production technology
with increasing returns to scale. Manufacturing concentrates in cities, whose number and
location are determined endogenously. The agricultural sector produces one homogeneous
   2
    See also a literature on regional variation in industry activity from the Home Market Effect (Helpman
and Krugman, 1985; Matsuyama, 2017; Costinot et al., 2019).


                                                   5

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
good, using labor and land in rural areas, with constant returns to scale production.3 Goods
are traded with iceberg transportation costs. Consumers have Cobb-Douglas preferences
over agricultural goods and composite indices of manufactured goods in each industry, with
constant elasticity of substitution (CES) preferences over varieties of manufactured goods.
Within manufacturing, industry 1 has the highest elasticity of substitution across varieties,
followed by industry 2 and then industry 3, such that consumers are most willing to incur
transportation costs for industry 3 goods. Labor is supplied by consumers, who are fully
mobile across locations and sectors, and land is of homogeneous quality.
    The model has multiple equilibria, but Fujita, Krugman, and Mori (1999) explore the
following scenario. When aggregate population N is small, all manufacturing occurs in
the fixed initial city. As N increases, the agricultural frontier expands. Once N increases
sufficiently, there is enough market potential to produce some manufactured goods away
from the central city, and a “third-order” city emerges with manufacturing production only
in industry 1. As N grows further, the agricultural frontier keeps expanding and additional
cities emerge: more single-industry “third-order” cities, and a small number of two-industry
“second-order” cities that are further apart from the central city and each other. The initial
city is the only “first-order” city, by assumption, with all three manufacturing industries.
    In simulations, we explore how this model generates average impacts on city formation
around fixed initial starting locations in independent economies of different sizes. We assume
a range of values for aggregate population N that follows FKM, and we graph the share of
cases in which cities form at each distance r.4 The model is symmetrical around zero, and
like FKM we show locations that are on the positive side, distance r from the fixed starting
location.
    Figure 1 shows the averaged spatial distribution of cities. There is always a city at the
origin, by assumption, and some distances often have a city, while others rarely do (Panel
A). Panel B shows the averaged spatial distribution of “large cities,” which are second-order
or first-order cities with two or three manufacturing industries. These second-order and first-
order cities typically have larger populations in the model, on average, though population
density is not well-defined in the model because cities do not take up space.
    For each aggregate level of population, the FKM model determines city locations relative
to the fixed starting point where the central city emerges. We also consider the possibility
   3
      “Manufacturing” and “agriculture” could reflect a range of goods and services, where the important
feature of the model is that “manufacturing” is done in cities with increasing returns to scale and “agriculture”
is done across places with constant returns to scale.
    4
      We use the 16 distinct values for aggregate population N reported in Figure 7 of Fujita, Krugman, and
Mori (1999). Where there are bifurcations, we choose the side of the bifurcation associated with higher
population.



                                                       6

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
that the central city may not emerge exactly at a fixed point (e.g., an ancient port). Instead,
we allow for the initial city to form near the fixed starting point, at a location drawn randomly
from a normal distribution centered on the fixed starting point with a σ standard deviation.
We simulate the model 2,000 times, for each level of aggregate population, and graph the
share of cases in which cities form at each distance r, only on the positive side from the fixed
starting point.
    Figure 2 shows the share of cases in which cities form at each location, with increasing
spatial noise. There are visible waves in the probability of any city when allowing for small
spatial noise (Panel A), and further waves in large city locations (Panel B). Allowing for
more spatial noise, the peaks and valleys in small city locations overlap and this “wave
interference” generates a monotonic decline in the frequency of any city in distance from the
origin (Panel C).
    This notion of “wave interference” relates to asynchronous waves offsetting each other,
which here arises from “high-frequency” probability density functions for city locations that
obscure each other’s signal. The locations of large cities are less subject to this wave in-
terference because of their lower frequency, corresponding to larger underlying gaps. Thus,
as we move away from the origin, the probability of finding a large city decreases and then
increases (Panel D), reflecting the still-detectable shadow cast by the largest city. But as
spatial noise increases further, there are more monotonic declines for both all cities and large
cities (Panels E and F).
    Figure 3 overlays the spatial distributions of cities, with more or less spatial noise, for all
cities (Panel A) and large cities (Panel B). Panels C and D report the differences in these
lines, with a dip and upward movement in large city formation (Panel D) and a smoother
decline and leveling out in all city formation (Panel C). Appendix Figures A.1, A.2, and A.3
report similar figures for the probability that particular distances exceed certain population
density thresholds, separating distances into sized grid cells and normalizing the density
thresholds based on the grid cell size and aggregate population.
    These simulations suggest how agglomeration shadows appear when averaging impacts
on nearby areas from multiple starting cities, each “seeded” at a separate location (e.g., an
ancient port). Agglomeration shadows are most clearly visible for large densely-populated
cities when seeds pin down the precise location of starting cities. Due to wave interference,
these shadows become less visible as spatial noise in the starting city location increases,
particularly shadows for smaller urban areas that are closer together. We then expect ag-
glomeration shadows to be more visible for large cities than smaller cities and when starting
city locations are precisely pinned down (e.g., when the natural harbor survived) than when
there is more spatial noise in starting city locations (e.g., when the natural harbor disap-


                                                 7

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
peared).
    We expect a similar form of wave interference from spatial noise due to heterogeneity
in the model parameters, which presumably vary across time periods and regions where
urban hierarchies emerge. For example, higher or lower transportation costs would shrink
or expand the wave pattern in city locations and create wave interference when averaging
across those areas. Cities also take up space, and variation in this space will also create a
wave pattern resulting in interference. Rather than simulate each of these cases, we note
that adding noise to the starting city location is analytically convenient, maintaining the
same solution as FKM, and also corresponds to cases in which the starting city location is
pinned down more or less precisely at an ancient port location, depending on whether the
natural harbor survived.
    The FKM model provides one underlying micro structure that generates agglomeration
shadows, but different micro structures could also generate the empirical occurrence of ag-
glomeration shadows and wave interference obscuring small gaps between smaller cities.
FKM focuses on local increasing returns to scale in manufacturing production, which gen-
erates agglomeration shadows because nearby (shadowed) places can import goods and do
not benefit from local returns to scale. A similar mechanism can also apply in the case of
local knowledge spillovers in manufacturing, and different micro structures can have different
welfare implications. Rather than focusing on parameter estimation, we use the simulations
to show how agglomeration shadows may appear in data.
I.C   Estimating Agglomeration Shadows
The FKM model illustrates endogenous city formation, but takes an initial starting city
as given, which highlights a central empirical challenge: finding exogenous “fixed” starting
locations for local urban networks. A city may form in a particular place when surrounding
areas are unsuitable, rather than the city itself discouraging nearby city formation. Related
empirical literature takes city locations as given and estimates how population growth varies
with distance to cities (Ali et al., 2009; Tervo, 2010; Cuberes, Desmet, and Rappaport, 2021;
Beltrán Tapia, Dı́ez-Minguela, and Martinez-Galarraga, 2021).
    We look to estimate how an urban hierarchy emerges, in which cities affect each other’s
development over a long time horizon. Indeed, Bosker and Buringh (2017) find that, from
800-1800, new European cities were less likely to form within 20km of existing cities and more
likely to form 20-100km from existing cities. European cities were also more likely to form in
areas with transportation network advantages, which relates to a literature that explores how
economic activity in some places can be affected positively and negatively by connections
to other places (Redding and Sturm, 2008; Faber, 2014; Donaldson and Hornbeck, 2016;


                                                8

                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Barsanetti, 2023; Hornbeck and Rotemberg, 2024).
    We use ancient ports that encouraged city growth in particular places, due to highly-local
coastline characteristics, to estimate impacts on surrounding areas. This is an advantage of
ancient ports, in contrast to using all ancient cities whose locations reflect the economic
suitability of their surrounding areas to a greater extent. Another useful feature of ancient
port locations is that sufficient time has passed for some of them to grow cities, and for the
resulting cities to become locked into place (as in Michaels and Rauch 2018), such that we
can then explore impacts on surrounding areas.
    Our empirical strategy draws on the literature on “pointwise” path dependence, which
highlights that city locations can be influenced by geographic features that had historical
economic relevance. Bleakley and Lin (2012) estimate that “portage sites,” where waterway
transportation required carrying goods around rapids, became places with persistently higher
population density in the United States.5 The theory of Fujita and Mori (1996) explores
how cities may form in port locations and continue to thrive after ports themselves become
less central to their economic activities. We use the path dependence of activity at ancient
port locations to explore how these sites influenced the spatial distribution of population in
surrounding areas and identify agglomeration shadows.
    An advantage of analyzing ancient port locations, which were “seeds” for later cities, is
that the local geographic feature that gave rise to an ancient port is plausibly not directly
associated with modern outcomes in places 10-50km away. Even for the ancient port locations
themselves, the large majority of these locations have no commercial shipping presence today
and many have no apparent port structures in satellite images. Even when the natural harbor
survived, maritime activities are not as central to the modern economy. Ducruet et al. (2024)
find zero impact on local population from even large-scale commercial ports in the modern
era, though containerization raised population around some ports relative to other ports
(Brooks, Gendron-Carrier, and Rua, 2021). Port structures in surrounding locations may
compete with each other but can also be complementary; in our context, we do not find
evidence of local spatial crowd-out in modern port construction among our ancient port
locations.
    A related literature analyzes the historical development and evolution of cross-city trad-
ing networks (Greif, 1993; Abulafia, 2011; Barjamovic et al., 2019; Flückiger et al., 2021;
Bakker et al., 2021; Maurer and Rauch, 2022), whereas we focus on the local economic ge-
   5
    Bleakley and Lin (2012) also show the emergence of “sister cities” at river mouths downriver from their
corresponding portage sites, though we control for distance to the coast and river mouths that have direct
geographic advantages. Roman roads also generate higher local modern economic activity (Dalgaard et al.,
2022; de Benedictis, Licio, and Pinna, 2023), with long-run increases in economic activity also around the
Inca Road (Franco, Galiani, and Lavado, 2021) and Silk Road (Ahmad and Chicoine, 2021).



                                                    9

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
ography around ancient port locations and the cities they seeded. We examine ancient port
locations, rather than ancient cities, because even those ancient city locations may reflect
nearby areas’ characteristics and an already-developing urban hierarchy. Ancient ports re-
flect the highly-local geographic availability of natural harbors in the ancient era, whereas
ancient transportation infrastructure follows desirable and feasible routes. The ancient port
structures are long gone, and even the natural harbors are gone in a fifth of cases, and we
verify that our estimates are robust to controlling for proximity to ancient roads or larger
ancient cities.
II       Data Construction
II.A       Ancient Port Locations
We start with a database of ancient port locations, assembled by de Graauw (2019), which
has precise geographic coordinates of ports mentioned in ancient texts and histories. The full
database includes 4,561 ancient ports across Western and Southern Europe, North Africa,
and Western Asia. We exclude ports more than 50km from the modern coast and those in
remote areas with less complete coverage, which leaves 4,263 ancient ports (Figure 4).
    We do not observe other characteristics in the ancient era for these port locations, but
we expect these locations had natural harbors following exchanges with de Graauw.6 These
ancient ports are defined as places that served seafarers, rather than just local fishing. An-
cient seafarers had more need for frequent stops and safe harbors, in contrast to the modern
era in which fewer ports are needed.
    For each ancient port location, we use Google Earth images to hand-code additional data
for the modern period, including whether these locations have a natural harbor. We focus
on the presence of natural harbors, setting aside the visible influence of human-made harbor
protections, and our use of “harbor” refers to “natural harbor” unless otherwise specified.
For ancient port locations, 80% retained their natural harbor (Figure 4, Panel B) and 20%
lost their natural harbor (Figure 4, Panel C). We also collect data on the presence of modern
port structures: 46% have any port structures and 6% have commercial port structures.
    The loss of natural harbors was fairly common and widespread, occurring throughout
the sample region. Typical reasons for the loss of a natural harbor are long-run natural
processes of silting and coastal drift, along with rarer sinking and land rise. Harbor loss
occurred even near major ancient cities, such as Rome (Portus, Ostia Antica), Alexandria
(Thonis-Heracleion), Leptis Magna, and Caesarea Maritima, as people were unable to resist
the natural processes causing harbor loss for long periods.
     6
    There are 22 open-water ancient ports, which had more human-made support and were less reliant on a
natural harbor, which we exclude in robustness checks.



                                                  10

                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
II.B    Population Data
We use population data for 1km-by-1km grid cells in 2015 from GPWv4 (CIESIN, 2018).
GPWv4 uses the areal weighting of detailed population data to assign all grid cells a popu-
lation in 2015, also drawing on data from other years and estimated growth rates.
    Our sample covers 2.3 million grid cells within 50km of the coast and within 200km of
their nearest ancient port. For context, in the ancient era, a typical day’s travel for pack
animals or carts was 12-30km (Scheidel, 2015), and medieval royal itineraries suggest that a
day’s land travel speed was stable at around 40km per day for many centuries (Hall, 2023).
4,263 grid cells have at least one ancient port, and Appendix Figure A.4 shows the number
of sample grid cells by distance to their nearest ancient port.
    These data provide detailed geographic variation in “city” and “urban” activity. We
define “city” activity as log population density above 9, or roughly 8,000 people per square
km. We define “urban” activity as log population density above 6, or roughly 400 people
per square km. We also report impacts on average log population density.7
    For robustness analysis, we use other measures of local economic activity. We use grid-cell
population data for 2000, or GRUMP data (CIESIN, 2011), based on an earlier version of
the GPW database that reflects a less-developed data model.8 We also check robustness to
using population data from the Global Human Settlement Layer or GHSL (Schiavina, Freire,
and MacManus, 2019).9 Our later simulation exercises also use city locations from GHSL’s
Urban Centre Database (Florczyk et al., 2019), which provides city centroid coordinates
and geographic area along with total population. It would be useful to have population
data through the intermediate historical periods, between the ancient era and present-day,
but data are not available at a fine enough spatial resolution to cover economic activity
comprehensively in and around the ancient port locations.
II.C    Geographic Characteristics and Other Data
Our empirical analysis allows for spatial variation in geographic determinants of cities and
economic activity, in contrast to the motivating theoretical framework that assumes a fea-
tureless plain. We look to control for “first nature” location characteristics.
   Along with restricting our analysis to areas within 50km of the coast, we measure grid
   7
      Throughout the paper, “log” refers to the natural logarithm.
   8
      The GRUMP dataset uses an older version of GPW data as an input (GPWv3) and then reallocates the
population data according to urban-rural distributions within administrative units based on night lights data
and settlement population counts. GPWv4 instead uses higher-quality population inputs to construct a grid,
with coverage and granularity improvements such that the number of input administrative units increases
five-fold. As a result, GPWv4 has nonzero population densities at many more locations.
    9
      GHSL re-weights and adjusts the same inputs as GPWv4 with a focus on “built-up” areas and settle-
ments. Because we are interested in the lack of settlement density as well as its presence, which can be
sensitive to GHSL decisions about city boundaries, we use the GPWv4 model in our main specifications.


                                                     11

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
cells’ distance to the coast, distance to major rivers, and latitude/longitude. We also include
terrain ruggedness, based on the standard deviation of elevations within the grid cell, which
influenced locations of economic activity in the region (Nunn and Puga, 2012; Accetturo,
Cascarano, and de Blasio, 2019). Our baseline controls also include grid cells’ average tem-
perature and precipitation in both January and July.
    For robustness analysis, we use a variety of other geographic characteristics. We measure
agricultural suitability from the FAO-GAEZ database for 6 crops: potatoes, cowpeas, olives,
chickpeas, wheat, and barley. We also measure whether a grid cell is in a desert. We define
grid cells’ country or, given the endogenous formation of country boundaries, group cells into
2-degree square fixed effects. We measure whether grid cells are on an island, and sometimes
exclude cells on islands smaller than 2,500km2 .
    We also use some data from the ancient era. These include data on locations of the
most important ancient cities and towns from the Barrington Atlas (Talbert, 2000; Hanson,
2016): the 14 most important ancient cities in our region (“Category 1”); the 160 next most
important (“Category 2”); and 813 less important cities and towns (“Category 3”). We
compare the local impacts of ancient ports to these ancient cities, and sometimes exclude
areas within 20km of Category 1 ancient cities. We also measure distance to the nearest
Roman road, as a potential control variable though endogenous to ancient development.
    Appendix A provides additional details on the data sources and our database construc-
tion.
III   Main Estimating Equations
We start by estimating the local impacts of ancient ports on modern outcomes in grid cell i:

(1)                                 Yi = βP orti + θXi + εi .

Outcomes Yi include log population density and indicators for log population density exceed-
ing 6 (urban activity) or 9 (city activity). The coefficient β reports differences for grid cells
with an ancient port, compared to other grid cells with similar geographic characteristics
(Xi ). Our baseline controls included in Xi are: log distance to the coast; log distance to the
nearest major river; latitude; longitude; terrain ruggedness; and average temperature and
precipitation in both January and July.
    Our main specification extends equation (1), estimating impacts by distance to nearest
ancient ports:
                      P50km    H              Harbor
              Yi =      d=0km βd N earestP orti      ∈ [d, d + 1)
(2)                   P50km    NH             N oHarbor
                  +     d=0km βd N earestP orti         ∈ [d, d + 1) + θXi + εi .

                                                 12

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
The coefficients βdH report impacts by distance to the nearest ancient port with a surviving
natural harbor, which is likelier to pin down city locations to ancient port locations. The
coefficients βdN H report impacts by distance to the nearest ancient port with no surviving
natural harbor.10 More distant ports could also matter, in principle, but the motivating
theoretical framework has clearest predictions for distance from a particular fixed starting
location. We jointly estimate these distance bins, for each type of ancient port, because
proximity to an ancient port without a harbor is correlated with proximity to an ancient
port with a harbor. We include all baseline controls from equation (1).
    We graph these non-parametric estimates, by distance bin. We also report the fitted rela-
tionship with log distance to nearest ancient port, along with estimated deviations between
the non-parametric estimates and this fitted relationship.
    Our baseline specifications report standard errors clustered by 8km-by-8km groups, which
reflects typical large-city boundaries in our sample region.11 We allow for spatial correlation
across grid cells because cities take up space, whereby one large city may generate measured
“city activity” across nearby cells. The statistical inference is robust to different adjustments
for correlated outcomes across nearby cells.12
IV     Population Growth and Agglomeration Shadows around Ancient Ports
IV.A     Main Estimates
Table 1 reports higher modern population density in grid cells with ancient ports, compared
to otherwise geographically-similar grid cells, from estimating equation (1). Grid cells with
an ancient port are 1.7 percentage points more likely to have city population density (Panel
A, Column 3), which is large relative to the sample mean probability of 0.2 percentage
points. Ancient port grid cells are also 12 percentage points more likely to have urban
population density (Column 2), compared to a sample mean probability of 7.1 percentage
points. Average population density is also 60% higher in ancient port grid cells (Column 1).
The impacts of ancient ports are more subtle than the impacts of ancient cities themselves
(Panel B), which are potentially more related to the suitability of surrounding areas for city
formation, but there is a sufficiently large number of ancient ports for their effects to be
  10
     We mostly compare these coefficients to each other, but their absolute value is estimated relative to the
omitted distance categories that are >50km for each port type.
  11
     We cluster by 1/12-degree-by-1/12-degree groups, which are roughly 8km-by-8km squares in the middle
of our sample region. By comparison, 8km is the median city diameter for cities in our sample region (from
GHSL 2019).
  12
     We also report standard errors two-way clustered by offset 8km-by-8km groups, shifted by 4km North-
South and East-West to allow for spatial correlation across the 8km-by-8km groups, or clustered by 25km-
by-25km groups. We report Conley standard errors, which adjust for spatial correlation that declines linearly
up to a distance cutoff of 4km or 8km, which are computationally intensive for the entire sample but similar
to the group-clustered standard errors.


                                                     13

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
precisely estimated.
    Figure 5 shows impacts on average population density by distance to ancient ports, from
estimating equation (2). The impacts on average population density decline in distance
to ancient ports and remain positive at 50km, relative to further grid cells. The nearby
impacts are larger for ancient ports that retained their natural harbor (blue circles), but still
substantial for ancient ports that have lost their natural harbor (red circles).
    Figure 6 shows impacts on urban density and city density, by distance to ancient ports,
which correspond to the simulated appearance of agglomeration shadows in Section I. There
is greater likelihood of city density at the ancient port, or within a few kilometers, when the
ancient port location has retained its natural harbor (Panel B, blue circles). This probability
of city density declines quickly in distance, however, and is lowest around 20km from the
ancient port before increasing moderately out to a distance of around 40km. By contrast,
when the ancient port location has lost its natural harbor, there is more spatial noise in that
starting city location out to 20km before the probability of city density declines (Panel B,
red circles). Panel A reports corresponding estimates for urban density, which show more
monotonic and continued declines in urban activity by distance to ancient ports.
    Panels C and D of Figure 6 report the differences in these estimates (βdH − βdN H ), which
correspond to the simulated differences in Panels C and D of Figure 3. In our data, as in the
simulations based on FKM, there is a distinctive relative dip in the likelihood of city density
at intermediate distances (Panel D) and a more flattened relative decline in urban activity
(Panel C).
    Figure 7 adds a fitted log relationship to the estimates from Figure 6, Panels A and B.
The decline in urban activity is roughly logarithmic in distance to the ancient ports (Panel
A), whereas the dip in city activity (Panel B) at intermediate distances is more distinctive
from a smooth logarithmic decay in distance. The decline in city density is more rapid from
0-20km from the ancient port location, and then this pattern reverses from 20-40km. Panels
C and D of Figure 7 report the deviation in the estimates from the fitted log relationship,
by distance. When the ancient port more precisely pins down a starting city in that location
(i.e., when that ancient port has retained its natural harbor), there is a distinctive decline in
the likelihood of city activity at intermediate distances. Once at a further distance, however,
there is again a greater likelihood of a city emerging relative to the fitted log relationship.
    Table 2 reports a few numbers from Figures 6 and 7, Panel D. From Panel D of Figure
6, the differences in city probability are -0.42 percentage points at 20km and 0.12 percent-
age points at 40km, as compared to the sample mean probability of 0.20 percentage points
(Table 2, Panel A, Columns 1 and 2). This difference of 0.54 percentage points is statisti-
cally significant (Column 3). From Panel D of Figure 7, the deviation from log fit is -0.25


                                                 14

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
percentage points at 20km and 0.16 percentage points at 40km (Table 2, Panel B).
    Cities “seeded” at ancient port locations appear to generate agglomeration shadows, dis-
couraging the formation of cities at intermediate distances. The length of this agglomeration
shadow is similar to a typical day’s travel of 12-30km for pack animals or carts in the ancient
era (Scheidel, 2015). Cities were more likely to form further away, where there was less direct
competition with city activity at the ancient port location.
    Our analysis focuses on the appearance of agglomeration shadows in city formation within
a 50km-radius catchment zone. In principle, similar underlying economic forces could influ-
ence highly-tradable economic activities at much further distances – and in ways that interact
across multiple starting cities – but modeling and estimating such interactions across further
distances is beyond the scope of our analysis.
IV.B     Robustness
The appearance of agglomeration shadows, around cities seeded at ancient ports, is not
sensitive to adjusting for some other sources of spatial variation in economic activity. We
explore several types of adjustments to our baseline analysis: controlling for additional grid
cell characteristics; sample restrictions; alternative measures of city locations; and adjusted
inference for spatial correlation.
    One concern would be if grid cells within 10-30km of ancient ports happen to be par-
ticularly less suitable for city formation than grid cells closer to (or further from) ancient
ports. Our baseline specification controls for log distance to the coast; log distance to the
nearest major river; latitude; longitude; terrain ruggedness; and average temperature and
precipitation in both January and July. Appendix Figure A.5 includes additional controls
for geographic characteristics of the 1km-by-1km grid cells: six crop-specific measures of
agricultural suitability (wheat, barley, chickpeas, cowpeas, olives, potatoes);13 ; suitability of
nearby waters for fishing;14 log distance to the mouth of a river; indicators for being within
2km, 5km, and 10km of the coast, a river, and the mouth of a river; elevation; and indicators
for being in a desert or on an island. Appendix Figure A.6 excludes all grid cells on islands
smaller than 2,500 square kilometers (5% of all grid cells). Appendix Figure A.7 reports
similar estimates when excluding 216 locations that de Graauw is less certain of their use as
ancient ports.
    We also report estimates that adjust for other features of the ancient economy. Appendix
Figure A.8 includes controls for grid cells’ log distance to the nearest Roman road, along with
  13
      From FAO GAEZ’s historical agro-climatic crop suitability data, assuming low inputs (FAO, 2012). The
first five crops were important in the ancient era, among those with available crop-specific data, whereas
potatoes were influential later (Nunn and Qian, 2011).
   14
      Following Dalgaard, Knudsen, and Selaya (2020), we use the average suitability of waters within 100km
for 15 common fish species, with data from Aquamaps (2019).


                                                    15

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
log distance to 14 important ancient cities (Barrington 1 sites), though these already reflect
responses to the early formation of a geographic urban hierarchy. Appendix Figure A.9
excludes grid cells within 20km of 22 ancient open-water ports, which reflect known human-
made investment in artificial harbor breakwaters, and Appendix Figure A.10 excludes grid
cells within 20km of the Barrington 1 sites.
    Our sample covers a broad geographic area, but our estimates are not sensitive to adjust-
ing for more regional variation in economic activity. Appendix Figure A.11 includes controls
for 2-degree by 2-degree fixed effects in cells’ latitude and longitude, and Appendix Figure
A.12 includes country fixed effects.
    Our main analysis classifies “city activity” and “urban activity” as grid cells with log
population density greater than 9 and 6, respectively. Appendix Figures A.13 and A.14 show
the emergence of agglomeration shadows as the population density threshold increases from
5 to 10. We use population data from 2015, using version 4 of the GPW model, but estimates
are similar using population data from 2000 from an earlier version of the model (Appendix
Figure A.15). Estimates are also similar in Appendix Figure A.16 using population data
from 2015 from the GHSL-POP model (Schiavina, Freire, and MacManus, 2019). Appendix
Figure A.17 reports estimates using city locations from GHSL (Florczyk et al., 2019), where
the outcome is being within the radius of a city of population over 500k.
    We allow for spatial correlation across grid cells, as the median-size city in our sample
region has a radius of 4km and so one realization of city formation can be jointly reflected
in nearby cells. Our baseline inference clusters in 1/12-degree by 1/12-degree groups, or
roughly 8km by 8km squares in the middle of our sample region. Appendix Figure A.18
reports similar standard errors when two-way clustering with offset groups, shifted by 1/24
of a degree, which relaxes the assumption that grid cells are independent across the original
group boundaries. The statistical presence of agglomeration shadows is also not sensitive
to increasing the group size to 1/4-degree by 1/4-degree (Appendix Figure A.19), approxi-
mately 25km by 25km. It is computationally intensive to allow for a smooth decay in spatial
correlation across the 2.3 million grid cells, following Conley (1999), but the statistical infer-
ence is similar with a linear decay in spatial correlation around each grid cell up to a distance
cutoff of 4km (Appendix Figure A.20) or 8km (Appendix Figure A.21).
IV.C    Competition Across Cities versus Across Ports
Cities seeded at ancient ports appear to cast agglomeration shadows that discourage nearby
city formation, consistent with simulations in Section I. One potential mechanism is that
ports themselves make nearby ports less needed and thereby discourage city formation at
nearby ports. We find little evidence for this port competition, however, and more evidence


                                                 16

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
for city competition, in which cities discourage nearby city formation largely separate from
impacts through port structures themselves.
    To explore these mechanisms, we restrict our sample to grid cells with ancient ports and
estimate how the loss of natural harbors influences that grid cell and surrounding grid cells:

(3)            Yi = β1 N oHarbori + β2 SurroundingShareN oHarbori + θXi + εi .

Outcomes Yi include whether that grid cell has modern port structures, along with log
population density and indicators for log population density exceeding 6 (urban activity) or
9 (city activity). The coefficient β1 reports differences for ancient port grid cells that have
since lost their natural harbor, compared to ancient port grid cells that still have a natural
harbor. The coefficient β2 reports differences when a greater share of ancient port grid cells
within 5-50km have lost their natural harbor. We control for the number of other ancient
port grid cells within 5-50km, in Xi , along with our other baseline controls (log distance to
the coast; log distance to the nearest major river; latitude; longitude; terrain ruggedness;
and average temperature and precipitation in both January and July).15
    Table 3 reports that losing a natural harbor substantially decreases the probability of that
grid cell having a modern port structure (Column 1, row 1). However, when surrounding
ancient ports have lost their natural harbor, and are thereby less likely to have modern
port structures, there is no increase in the likelihood of that grid cell having port structures
(Column 1, row 2). This suggests that nearby ports do not systematically crowd-out (or
crowd-in) port activity through direct competition (or collaboration).
    Table 3 also reports that losing a natural harbor decreases that grid cell’s average popu-
lation density, likelihood of urban activity, and likelihood of city activity (Columns 2-4, row
1). These outcomes are greater, however, when surrounding ancient ports have lost their
natural harbor and thereby have lower population density (Columns 2-4, row 2).16 This
suggests that cities themselves are in competition, with increased economic activity in a grid
cell from decreased surrounding economic activity.
V      Modern City Spacing: Realized versus Random
This section considers the general spacing between all modern cities in our sample region,
which complements our earlier analysis of agglomeration shadows around ancient port loca-
tions. Our previous analysis explores how the evolved spatial structure responds to particular
stimuli over a long time horizon, from the need for many shelter points along the coast in the
  15
    For this specification, we omit 71 ancient port grid cells that have no other ancient port within 5-50km.
  16
    By contrast, if spatially correlated historical shocks induce local harbor loss and lower local economic
activity, this would generate a negative relationship between grid cell economic activity and surrounding
harbor loss.


                                                     17

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
ancient era, whereas this last exercise characterizes spatial patterns in that evolved urban
hierarchy. In such analyses of the modern cross-section, city locations are taken as given
and their spacing is characterized, once their size and location have co-evolved with their
surroundings.
    We now consider the distance between each city and its nearest city, and explore whether
the realized distribution of minimum distances is distinct from a simulated random distribu-
tion. Agglomeration shadows would result in fewer-than-expected cities with close neighbors,
with more-than-expected nearest neighbors after emerging from that shadow. In focusing on
the distribution of minimum city distances, with a distribution-free test based on a simulated
random null, this exercise differs from other work in economic geography that characterizes
the equilibrium spatial distribution of cities (Dobkins and Ioannides, 2001; Ioannides and
Overman, 2004; Rauch, 2014; Mori, Smith, and Hsu, 2020; Henderson, Peng, and Venables,
2022; Mori et al., 2023). Our analysis is related to a “dartboard” approach to measur-
ing industry-level agglomeration (Ellison and Glaeser, 1997, 1999; Duranton and Overman,
2005), which compares observed patterns to what could be expected by random chance.
    Our analysis here is similar to an approach in biology to characterize the spatial distri-
bution of tree seedlings (Diggle, 1983). We adjust this approach for an economic geography
context, however. Rather than drawing purely random city locations, we predict city like-
lihood based on grid cell characteristics and use the fitted value for each grid cell as a
probability weight when drawing different random locations for cities.17 For example, this
allows for the random locations of cities to be systematically close to the coast. More suit-
able geographic locations for cities are positively spatially correlated, with respect to the
observed characteristics. If the remaining unobserved characteristics are also (conditionally)
positively spatially correlated, the random benchmark will be too spaced apart, making it
difficult to detect agglomeration shadows.
    We use GHSL data for urban center locations in our sample region, and implement our
analysis separately for cities in three population size categories: over 500k, over 250k, and
over 100k. This exercise relies on administrative city boundaries from GHSL, rather than
grid cell data, because two nearby dense grid cells could be part of the same city. Further,
population density varies across different cutoffs within a city. However, greater population
density is correlated with greater city population.18
    Figure 8, Panel A, shows that modern large cities are less likely to have neighbors within
  17
      For this prediction, we use a probit model with country fixed effects and the baseline geography controls
from equations (1) and (2). This ensures positive weights, which are less than one, and restricts city locations
to countries with cities in our sample region.
   18
      The correlation between log population and log population density is 0.37. Cities with greater population
are also more likely to have grid cells with log population density above 9.



                                                      18

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
40km, and more likely to have neighbors within 40-60km, consistent with agglomeration
shadows around large cities and the relative success of cities just beyond those shadows.
The red line shows the realized cumulative density function (CDF) of minimum distances
between the 61 modern large cities and their nearest large city. The black lines show the
CDF from a weighted random draw of 61 city locations in 1,000 simulations, graphing the
median along with the 5th centile and 95th centile. For the red line to be to the right of
the thin black line, it means that the realized distribution of modern cities has fewer nearest
neighbors within that distance than 95% of randomly drawn city locations. When the red
line increases faster than the black lines, there are more observed nearest neighbors at that
distance than would be expected by random chance.
    Panels C and E of Figure 8 show that agglomeration shadows are less pronounced when
including smaller cities. The observed CDF is somewhat distinct from random simulations
at some initial distances, before increasing more rapidly, but this difference is less substantial
than for the largest cities.
    Using defined “city” locations to measure agglomeration shadows raises a potential mea-
surement concern: the area just outside a defined city may not be another city because, if
it were, it may have been included in that first defined city.19 We can adjust for this effect
by shifting the simulated distribution of cities, however, using the variation in city sizes to
construct non-overlapping circles around cities: if we randomly draw another city within
that circle, we drop it and draw another city.20 This shifts the simulated distributions to the
right, as shown in Panels B, D, and F of Figure 8. There are still fewer-than-expected large
cities within 40km of other large cities and more catch-up between 40-60km (Panel B), but
there are no longer detectable agglomeration shadows for cities with population above 250k
or 100k (Panels D and F).
    These results are consistent with agglomeration shadows around large cities, despite the
potential for spatially-correlated location fundamentals and particular shocks accumulated
over the course of millennia that might lead to more close-by cities than we would expect by
chance.
  19
      That is, cities may indeed develop near each other but become considered one large city: when the
locations of city boundaries and city centers are defined ex post, along with the concurrent development of
surrounding areas, these definitions could overstate agglomeration shadows. For example, if the boundary
of a large city is drawn such that it contains nearby densely populated areas, then areas just outside that
boundary will mechanically have low population density.
   20
      For each city, we take the square root of its area over π to define the radius of a circle that approximates
that city’s geographic footprint. When redrawing cities, we randomly assign each real radius to each drawn
city. Drawing is done sequentially, such that we draw a city randomly, then randomly assign a radius, and
then redraw if, for any other already-drawn city, the distance between the new city and the already-drawn
city is less than the sum of their radii. Otherwise, this drawn city is kept and its radius cannot be assigned
again.



                                                       19

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
VI   Conclusion
The location of economic activity has direct implications for landowners and, since people
are generally not perfectly mobile, also for individuals’ well-being more generally. Indeed, a
motivation for place-based policies is to assist people in targeted locations by encouraging
local growth. Locally successful policy may discourage similar growth nearby, however,
in models in which concentrations of economic activity compete with and discourage rival
centers caught in their “agglomeration shadow.”
    We focus on identifying agglomeration shadows, using ancient ports as seeds from which
cities emerged. The locations of ancient ports, which were shaped by very local coastline fea-
tures, provide empirical traction to explore impacts on nearby places. Ancient port locations
may themselves continue to benefit from their local geography, but these locations are plau-
sibly uncorrelated with a down-and-up wave in unobservable grid cell characteristics 20km
and 40km away. Further, where natural harbors survived in these ancient port locations, the
location of modern cities was more precisely pinned down, mitigating the problem of wave
interference. Where harbors did not survive, even with strong agglomeration shadows, the
alternating peaks and valleys in economic activity can average out and appear as smooth
declines in economic activity.
    We estimate agglomeration shadows in city formation, which appear as a distinctive
down-and-up wave in city formation. Large cities are less likely to form at intermediate
distances from ancient ports, caught in the agglomeration shadow of cities seeded at ancient
port locations. Cities are more likely to form at further distances, however, just beyond that
shadow. This contrasts with a more general decline in population density and urban activity
in distance to the ancient port, which is consistent with nearby places becoming confined
to second-tier status within an urban hierarchy. Nearby harbor loss also does not directly
affect own port activity in the modern era, positively or negatively, but does influence the
urban hierarchy.
    Setting aside the ancient port locations, we show that the spacing between all large
cities is statistically distinct from random. There are fewer large cities at intermediate
distances than we would expect at random, after accounting for locational fundamentals.
In characterizing the cross-sectional spatial distribution of economic activity, this analysis
complements our study of the emergence of city spacing in response to particular stimuli
from ancient port locations.
    Early investments in local economic activity can generate sustained long-run local growth,
and we extend this literature to identify further impacts on the spatial organization of
economic activity in the surrounding urban hierarchy. When economic activity clusters in
a location, an “agglomeration shadow” can discourage some economic activities in nearby

                                                20

                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
locations until sufficient distance makes rival centers viable.




                                                 21

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
References
Abulafia, David. 2011. The Great Sea: A Human History of the Mediterranean. London: Allen
 Lane.

Accetturo, Antonio, Michele Cascarano, and Guido de Blasio. 2019. “Pirate Attacks and
 the Shape of the Italian Urban System.” Working Paper.

Ahlfeldt, Gabriel M., and Nicolai Wendland. 2013. “How Polycentric is a Monocentric City?
 Centers, Spillovers and Hysteresis.” Journal of Economic Geography, 13(1): 53–83.

Ahlfeldt, Gabriel M., Stephen J. Redding, Daniel M. Sturm, and Nikolaus Wolf. 2015.
 “The Economics of Density: Evidence from the Berlin Wall.” Econometrica, 83(6): 2127–2189.

Ahmad, Zofia, and Luke Chicoine. 2021. “Silk Roads to Riches: Persistence Along an Ancient
 Trade Network.” Working Paper.

Ali, Kamar, M. Rose Olfert, Mark D. Partridge, and Dan S. Rickman. 2009. “Do New
  Economic Geography Agglomeration Shadows Underlie Current Population Dynamics across the
  Urban Hierarchy?” Papers in Regional Science, 88(2): 445–467.

Alonso, William. 1964. Location and Land Use: Toward a General Theory of Land Rent. Cam-
  bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Bakker, Jan David, Stephan Maurer, Jörn-Steffen Pischke, and Ferdinand Rauch.
 2021. “Of Mice and Merchants: Connectedness and the Location of Economic Activity in the
 Iron Age.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 103(4): 652–665.

Barjamovic, Gojko, Thomas Chaney, Kerem Coşar, and Ali Hortaçsu. 2019. “Trade, Mer-
 chants, and the Lost Cities of the Bronze Age.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(3): 1455–
 1503.

Barsanetti, Bruno. 2023. “Road Endpoints and City Sizes.” Review of Economics and Statistics,
 1–45.

Beltrán Tapia, Francisco J., Alfonso Dı́ez-Minguela, and Julio Martinez-Galarraga.
 2021. “The Shadow of Cities: Size, Location and the Spatial Distribution of Population.” Annals
 of Regional Science, 66: 729–753.

Bleakley, Hoyt, and Jeffrey Lin. 2012. “Portage and Path Dependence.” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 127(2): 587–644.

Bloom, Nicholas, Erik Brynjolfsson, Lucia Foster, Ron Jarmin, Megha Patnaik, Itay
  Saporta-Eksten, and John Van Reenen. 2019. “What Drives Differences in Management
  Practices?” American Economic Review, 109(5): 1648–1683.

Bosker, Maarten, and Eltjo Buringh. 2017. “City Seeds: Geography and the Origins of the
 European City System.” Journal of Urban Economics, 98: 139–157.

Brooks, Leah, Nicolas Gendron-Carrier, and Gisela Rua. 2021. “The Local Impact of
  Containerization.” Journal of Urban Economics, 126.



                                                 22

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Center for International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN). 2011. “Global
 Rural-Urban Mapping Project (GRUMPv1): Population Density Grid.” Palisades, NY: NASA
 Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center. Version 1. Accessed 2021.

Center for International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN). 2018. “Gridded
 Population of the World (GPWv4): Population Density.” Palisades, NY: NASA Socioeconomic
 Data and Applications Center. Version 4, Revision 11. Accessed 2021.

Christaller, Walter. 1933. Die Zentralen Orte in Süddeutschland. Translated in 1966 by C.W.
 Baskin to The Central Places in Southern Germany. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Conley, Timothy G. 1999. “GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence.” Journal of
 Econometrics, 92(1): 1–45.

Costinot, Arnaud, Dave Donaldson, Margaret Kyle, and Heidi Williams. 2019. “The
 More We Die, the More We Sell? A Simple Test of the Home-Market Effect.” Quarterly Journal
 of Economics, 134(2): 843–894.

Cuberes, David, Klaus Desmet, and Jordan Rappaport. 2021. “Urban Growth Shadows.”
 Journal of Urban Economics, 123: 103334.

Cummins, Steven, and Sally Macintyre. 2002. “‘Food Deserts’ — Evidence and Assumption
 in Health Policy Making.” BMJ, 325(7361): 436–438.

Dalgaard, Carl-Johan, Anne Sofie B. Knudsen, and Pablo Selaya. 2020. “The Bounty of
 the Sea and Long-Run Development.” Journal of Economic Growth, 25(3): 259–295.

Dalgaard, Carl-Johan, Nicolai Kaarsen, Ola Olsson, and Pablo Selaya. 2022. “Roman
 Roads to Prosperity: Persistence and Non-Persistence of Public Infrastructure.” Journal of Com-
 parative Economics, 50(4): 896–916.

Davis, Donald R., and Jonathan I. Dingel. 2020. “The Comparative Advantage of Cities.”
 Journal of International Economics, 123: 103291.

de Benedictis, Luca, Vania Licio, and Anna Maria Pinna. 2023. “From the Historical Roman
  Road Network to Modern Infrastructure in Italy.” Journal of Regional Science, 63(5): 1162–1191.

de Graauw, Arthur. 2019. “The Catalogue of Ancient Coastal Settlements, Ports and Harbours.”
  Accessed 2019. https://www.ancientportsantiques.com/.

Diggle, Peter J. 1983. Statistical Anaylsis of Spatial Point Patterns. London: Academic Press.

Dingel, Jonathan I., Joshua D. Gottlieb, Maya Lozinski, and Pauline Mourot. 2023.
  “Market Size and Trade in Medical Services.” Working Paper.

Dobkins, Linda Harris, and Yannis M. Ioannides. 2001. “Spatial Interactions Among US
 Cities: 1900–1990.” Regional science and Urban Economics, 31(6): 701–731.

Donaldson, Dave, and Richard Hornbeck. 2016. “Railroads and American Economic Growth:
 A “Market Access” Approach.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(2): 799–858.

Ducruet, César, Réka Juhász, Dávid Krisztián Nagy, and Claudia Steinwender. 2024.
 “All Aboard: The Effects of Port Development.” Conditionally Accepted.

                                                 23

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Duranton, Gilles, and Diego Puga. 2004. “Micro-Foundations of Urban Agglomeration
 Economies.” In Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics. Vol. 4, 2063–2117. Amsterdam:
 Elsevier.

Duranton, Gilles, and Henry G. Overman. 2005. “Testing for Localization Using Micro-
 Geographic Data.” Review of Economic Studies, 72(4): 1077–1106.

Ellison, Glenn, and Edward L. Glaeser. 1997. “Geographic Concentration in US Manufactur-
  ing Industries: A Dartboard Approach.” Journal of Political Economy, 105(5): 889–927.

Ellison, Glenn, and Edward L. Glaeser. 1999. “The Geographic Concentration of Industry:
  Does Natural Advantage Explain Agglomeration?” American Economic Review, 89(2): 311–316.

Ellison, Glenn, Edward L. Glaeser, and William R. Kerr. 2010. “What Causes Indus-
  try Agglomeration? Evidence from Coagglomeration Patterns.” American Economic Review,
  100(3): 1195–1213.

Faber, Benjamin. 2014. “Trade Integration, Market Size, and Industrialization: Evidence from
  China’s National Trunk Highway System.” Review of Economic Studies, 81(3 (288)): 1046–1070.

Finkelstein, Amy, Matthew Gentzkow, and Heidi Williams. 2021. “Place-Based Drivers of
  Mortality: Evidence from Migration.” American Economic Review, 111(8): 2697–2735.

Florczyk, A., C. Corbane, M. Schiavina, M. Pesaresi, L. Maffenini, M. Melchiorri, P.
  Politis, F. Sabo, S. Freire, D. Ehrlich, T. Kemper, P. Tommasi, D. Airaghi, and L.
  Zanchetta. 2019. “GHS-UCDB R2019A: GHS Urban Centre Database 2015, Multitemporal and
  Multidimensional Attributes.” Brussels: European Commission, Joint Research Centre (JRC),
  Global Human Settlement Layer (GHSL). Accessed 2021.

Flückiger, Matthias, Erik Hornung, Mario Larch, Markus Ludwig, and Allard Mees.
  2021. “Roman Transport Network Connectivity and Economic Integration.” Review of Economic
  Studies, 89(2): 774–810.

Franco, Ana Paula, Sebastian Galiani, and Pablo Lavado. 2021. “Long-Term Effects of the
  Inca Road.” Working Paper.

Fujita, Masahisa, and Paul R. Krugman. 1995. “When is the Economy Monocentric?: Von
  Thünen and Chamberlin Unified.” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 25(4): 505–528.

Fujita, Masahisa, and Tomoya Mori. 1996. “The Role of Ports in the Making of Major Cities:
  Self-Agglomeration and Hub-Effect.” Journal of Development Economics, 49(1): 93–120.

Fujita, Masahisa, and Tomoya Mori. 2005. “Frontiers of the New Economic Geography.”
  Papers in Regional Science, 84(3): 377–405.

Fujita, Masahisa, Paul R. Krugman, and Anthony Venables. 1999. The Spatial Economy:
  Cities, Regions, and International Trade. Cambridge, MA: MIT press.

Fujita, Masahisa, Paul R. Krugman, and Tomoya Mori. 1999. “On the Evolution of Hier-
  archical Urban Systems.” European Economic Review, 43(2): 209–251.



                                                24

                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Gabaix, Xavier. 1999. “Zipf’s Law for Cities: An Explanation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 114(3): 739–767.

Giroud, Xavier, Simone Lenzu, Quinn Maingi, and Holger Mueller. 2021. “Propagation
  and Amplification of Local Productivity Spillovers.” Working Paper.

Glaeser, Edward L., and Joshua D. Gottlieb. 2009. “The Wealth of Cities: Agglomera-
  tion Economics and Spatial Equilibrium in the United States.” Journal of Economic Literature,
  47(December): 983–1028.

Greenstone, Michael, Richard Hornbeck, and Enrico Moretti. 2010. “Identifying Agglom-
 eration Spillovers: Evidence from Winners and Losers of Large Plant Openings.” Journal of
 Political Economy, 118(3): 536–598.

Greif, Avner. 1993. “Contract Enforceability and Economic Institutions in Early Trade: The
 Maghribi Traders’ Coalition.” American Economic Review, 525–548.

Hall, Jacob. 2023. “Travel Speed over the Longue Durée.” Working Paper.

Hanson, J.W. 2016. “Cities Database.” Oxford: Oxford Roman Economy Project (OXREP).
 Version 1.0. Accessed July 2020. http://www.romaneconomy.ox.ac.uk/.

Helpman, Elhanan, and Paul Krugman. 1985. Market Structure and Foreign Trade. Cam-
 bridge, MA: MIT Press.

Henderson, J. Vernon. 1974. “The Sizes and Types of Cities.” American Economic Review,
 64(4): 640–656.

Henderson, J. Vernon, Cong Peng, and Anthony Venables. 2022. “Growth in the African
 Urban Hierarchy.” Working Paper.

Hornbeck, Richard, and Martin Rotemberg. 2024. “Growth Off the Rails: Aggregate Pro-
 ductivity Growth in Distorted Economies.” Journal of Political Economy, Forthcoming.

International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) and Food and Agricul-
  ture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). 2020. “Global Agro-Ecological Zones
  (GAEZ).” Laxenburg, Austria: IIASA; Rome: FAO. Version 4.0. Accessed June 2024.

Ioannides, Yannis M., and Henry G. Overman. 2004. “Spatial Evolution of the US Urban
  System.” Journal of Economic Geography, 4(2): 131–156.

Jefferson, Mark. 1939. “The Law of the Primate City.” Geographical Review, 29(2): 226–232.

Kaschner, K., K. Kesner-Reyes, C. Garilao, J. Segschneider, T. Rius-Barile, J. Rees,
 and R. Froese. 2019. “AquaMaps: Predicted Range Maps for Aquatic Species.” Accessed May
 2024.

Lösch, August. 1940. Die Räumliche Ordnung der Wirtschaft. Translated in 1954 by Jena Fischer
  to The Economics of Location. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Marshall, Alfred. 1890. Principles of Economics. London: Macmillan and Co.



                                                 25

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Matsuyama, Kiminori. 2017. “Geographical Advantage: Home Market Effect in a Multi-Region
 World.” Research in Economics, 71(4): 740–758.

Maurer, Stephan, and Ferdinand Rauch. 2022. “Economic Geography Aspects of the Panama
 Canal.” Oxford Economic Papers, 75(1): 142–162.

Michaels, Guy, and Ferdinand Rauch. 2018. “Resetting the Urban Network: 117–2012.”
 Economic Journal, 128(608): 378–412.

Mills, Edwin S. 1967. “An Aggregative Model of Resource Allocation in a Metropolitan Area.”
 American Economic Review, 57(2): 197–210.

Mori, Tomoya, and Tony E Smith. 2015. “On the Spatial Scale of Industrial Agglomerations.”
 Journal of Urban Economics, 89: 1–20.

Mori, Tomoya, Takashi Akamatsu, Yuki Takayama, and Minoru Osawa. 2023. “Origin of
 Power Laws and Their Spatial Fractal Structure for City-Size Distributions.” Working Paper.

Mori, Tomoya, Tony E. Smith, and Wen-Tai Hsu. 2020. “Common Power Laws for Cities
 and Spatial Fractal Structures.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(12): 6469–
 6475.

Muth, Richard. 1969. Cities and Housing : The Spatial Pattern of Urban Residential Land Use.
 Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Nunn, Nathan, and Diego Puga. 2012. “Ruggedness: The Blessing of Bad Geography in
 Africa.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(1): 20–36. Accessed replication data September
 2019. https://diegopuga.org/data/rugged/.

Nunn, Nathan, and Nancy Qian. 2011. “The Potato’s Contribution to Population and Urban-
 ization: Evidence From A Historical Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2): 593–
 650.

Rauch, Ferdinand. 2014. “Cities as Spatial Clusters.” Journal of Economic Geography,
 14(4): 759–773.

Redding, Stephen J, and Daniel M. Sturm. 2008. “The Costs of Remoteness: Evidence from
 German Division and Reunification.” American Economic Review, 98(5): 1766–1797.

Scheidel, Walter. 2015. “Orbis: The Stanford Geospatial Network Model of the Roman World.”
  Working Paper.

Schiavina, Marcello, Sergio Freire, and Kytt MacManus. 2019. “GHS-POP R2019A - GHS
  Population Grid Multitemporal (1975-2015).” Brussels: European Commission, Joint Research
  Centre (JRC), Global Human Settlement Layer (GHSL). Accessed 2021.

Talbert, Richard L.A., ed. 2000. Barrington Atlas of the Greek and Roman World. Princeton,
  NJ: Princeton University Press.

Tervo, Hannu. 2010. “Cities, Hinterlands and Agglomeration Shadows: Spatial Developments in
  Finland During 1880–2004.” Explorations in Economic History, 47(4): 476–486.


                                                 26

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
von Thünen, Johann Heinrich. 1826. Der Isolierte Staat. Edited by Peter Hall. Translated
  in 1966 by Carla M. Wartenberg to Von Thünen’s Isolated State: An English Edition of Der
  Isolierte Staat. Oxford: Pergamon Press.




                                                27

                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Figure 1. Share of Instances with Cities by Distance to Fixed Starting City
Panel A. Any City (≥1 Industry)                    Panel B. Large City (≥2 Industries)




Notes: This figure shows the share of instances in which there is a city at the indicated distance r from a
fixed starting city, as modeled for the 16 aggregate population parameter values in Figure 7 of Fujita,
Krugman, and Mori (1999). Four of these 16 values are bifurcation values, where cities are “born” or “die”
or change their number of industries, and we use city locations on the right side of the bifurcation
associated with larger population.
   Panel A shows the share of instances with any city at that distance r, defined as a location with at least
one manufacturing industry. Panel B shows the share of instances with a large city at that distance r,
defined as a location with at least 2 manufacturing industries. The distance r is restricted to the positive
direction, along this one-dimensional economy, from the location of the fixed initial city at distance 0.




                                                     28

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Figure 2. Share of Simulations with Cities by Distance to Fixed Starting
          Location, with Increasing Spatial Noise
Panel A. Any City, with Low Noise                   Panel B. Large City, with Low Noise




Panel C. Any City, with Medium Noise                Panel D. Large City, with Medium Noise




Panel E. Any City, with High Noise                  Panel F. Large City, with High Noise




Notes: Each panel reports the share of simulations in which there is a city at the indicated distance r from
a fixed starting location. In each of 2,000 simulations, we shift the city locations from Figure 1 left or right
by a spatial noise term drawn from a mean zero normal distribution with increasing standard deviation:
“Low Noise” (σ = 0.25) in Panels A and B; “Medium Noise” (σ = 0.5) in Panels C and D; and “High
Noise” (σ = 1.0) in Panels E and F. The distance r is restricted to the positive direction from the location
of the fixed starting location at distance 0 (which can now differ from the location of that previously
central initial city).



                                                      29

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Figure 3. Share of Simulations with Cities by Distance: Medium versus High
          Noise
                                                Panel B. Large City, Medium and High
Panel A. Any City, Medium and High Noise
                                                         Noise




Panel C. Any City, Difference between           Panel D. Large City, Difference between
         Medium and High Noise                           Medium and High Noise




Notes: This figure compares the “Medium Noise” and “High Noise” cases from Figure 2. Panels A and B
show simulations with Medium and High Noise on the same plot, and Panels C and D show the difference
in shares (Medium Noise minus High Noise).




                                                  30

                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Figure 4. Ancient Port Locations in Our Main Sample
Panel A. All Ancient Ports




Panel B. Ancient Ports with a Modern Natural Harbor




Panel C. Ancient Ports without a Modern Natural Harbor




Notes: This figure shows the locations of ancient ports in our main sample. Panel A shows all ancient
ports, Panel B shows ancient port locations that have a natural harbor in modern satellite images, and
Panel C shows ancient port locations that do not have a natural harbor in modern satellite images.




                                                   31

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Figure 5. Impacts on Average Log Population Density,
          by Distance to Nearest Ancient Port




Notes: This figure shows impacts on average log density by distance to the nearest ancient port with and
without a natural harbor, from estimating equation (2). The sample is 1km-by-1km grid cells within 50km
of the coast, and include the baseline controls: log distance to the coast, log distance to the nearest major
river, latitude, longitude, terrain ruggedness, and average temperature and precipitation in both January
and July.
   Vertical lines report 95% confidence intervals, based on robust standard errors clustered at 1/12-degree-
by-1/12-degree groups (roughly 8km-by-8km in the middle of our sample region).




                                                     32

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Figure 6. Impacts on Probability of Urban Density or City Density,
          by Distance to Nearest Ancient Port
Panel A. Probability of Urban Density              Panel B. Probability of City Density




Panel C. Differences for Urban Density             Panel D. Differences for City Density




Notes: This figure shows impacts on the probability of a grid cell having “Urban Density” (ln population
density > 6) or “City Density” (ln population density > 9), by distance to the nearest ancient port with
and without a natural harbor, from estimating equation (2). The sample is 1km-by-1km grid cells within
50km of the coast, and include the baseline controls: log distance to the coast, log distance to the nearest
major river, latitude, longitude, terrain ruggedness, and average temperature and precipitation in both
January and July.
   Panels A and B show coefficients on distance to the nearest ancient port with a modern natural harbor
(blue circle) and without a modern natural harbor (red circle). Panels C and D show the differences
between these estimates (with harbor minus without harbor).
   Vertical lines report 95% confidence intervals, based on robust standard errors clustered at
1/12-degree-by-1/12-degree groups (roughly 8km-by-8km in the middle of our sample region).




                                                     33

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Figure 7. Impacts on Probability of Urban Density or City Density, with
          Fitted Log Relationship
Panel A. Probability of Urban Density               Panel B. Probability of City Density




Panel C. Urban, Difference from Log Fit             Panel D. City, Difference from Log Fit




Notes: Panels A and B reproduce Panels A and B from Figure 6, with the addition of two black lines that
represent the fitted log relationships from regressing the coefficients from distance bins 1–50 on log distance.
Panels C and D report the coefficients from Panels A and B, subtracting the fitted log relationships (black
lines). Vertical lines report 95% confidence intervals using the standard errors from Panels A and B.




                                                      34

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Figure 8. Modern City Spacing: Realized versus Random
Panel A. Cities with Population above 500k             Panel B. Cities with Population above 500k,
                                                                with Area Adjustment




Panel C. Cities with Population above 250k             Panel D. Cities with Population above 250k,
                                                                with Area Adjustment




Panel E. Cities with Population above 100k             Panel F. Cities with Population above 100k,
                                                                with Area Adjustment




Notes: This figure compares real and simulated distributions of distances between nearest cities, by city
size. The red line shows the real distribution of distances to cities. The central gray line shows the median
simulated distance, and the upper and lower gray lines show the 5th and 95th percentiles. We identify real
city locations and their 2015 populations using GHSL data. The distributions of random city locations are
randomly drawn 1,000 times from our baseline grid sample. For each city size category, the random draws
use probability weights for each grid cell based on its fitted value from a probit model predicting city
likelihood with country fixed effects and the baseline controls: log distance to the coast, log distance to the
nearest major river, latitude, longitude, terrain ruggedness, and average temperature and precipitation in
both January and July. For Panels B, D, and F, the “Area Adjustment” to the simulated black lines refers
to when cities are redrawn if they are within the geographic footprint of an already-placed city, as
described in Section V. The figure is truncated at 100km.




                                                      35

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Table 1. Estimated Impacts of Ancient Ports on Grid Cell Population Density

                              Ln Population Density          Urban Density               City Density
                                       (1)                        (2)                         (3)
 Panel A.
   Ancient Port                        0.589                     0.116                      0.017
                                      (0.044)                   (0.008)                    (0.004)

 Panel B.
   Barrington 1 City                   3.867                     0.663                      0.395
                                      (0.675)                   (0.124)                    (0.155)

   Barrington 2 City                   2.423                     0.418                      0.114
                                      (0.217)                   (0.048)                    (0.032)

   Barrington 3 City                   1.714                     0.308                      0.038
                                      (0.098)                   (0.022)                    (0.009)

 Outcome Mean                          3.290                     0.071                      0.002
                                      [1.888]                   [0.257]                    [0.045]

 Observations                       2,278,861                  2,278,861                  2,278,861

Notes: This table shows the relationship between ancient features and modern population densities, from
estimating equation (1). Column 1 reports estimated impacts on grid cell log population density, Column 2
reports estimated impacts on a grid cell having “Urban Density” (log population density > 6), and Column
3 reports impacts on a grid cell having “City Density” (log population density > 9). We measure
population density using 2015 population per square kilometer estimates from the GPWv4 model (CIESIN,
2018).
   Panel A shows effects of an ancient port site. For comparison, Panel B shows effects of ancient cities in
three size categories, using ancient city data from Talbert (2000) and Hanson (2016). In our sample,
restricted to 1km-by-1km grid cells within 50km of the coast, there are 10 cities in the 1st category, 101 in
the second category, and 480 in the third category.
   All estimates include the baseline controls for grid cell characteristics: log distance to the coast, log
distance to the nearest major river, latitude, longitude, terrain ruggedness (standard deviation of elevations
within the grid cell), and average temperature and precipitation in both January and July. In parentheses
are robust standard errors clustered by 1/12-degree-by-1/12-degree groups (roughly 8km-by-8km in the
middle of our sample region). For the outcome means, standard deviations are reported in square brackets.




                                                      36

                       Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Table 2. Probability of City Density at Distances to Ancient Port

                                               At                   At                 Difference:
                                             20km                 40km                40km - 20km
                                               (1)                  (2)                    (3)
   Panel A. With Natural Harbor vs. Without (from Figure 6, Panel D)
    Estimated Difference                    -0.0042               0.0012                 0.0054
                                           (0.0010)              (0.0006)               (0.0013)

   Panel B. With Natural Harbor vs. Log Fit (from Figure 7, Panel D)
    Estimated Deviation from Log Fit         -0.0025               0.0016                0.0040
                                            (0.0002)              (0.0005)              (0.0005)

   Outcome Mean                              0.0020               0.0020                 0.0020
                                            [0.0447]             [0.0447]               [0.0447]

   Observations                            2,278,861            2,278,861              2,278,861

Notes: This table reports a few numbers from Figures 6 and 7, Panel D. Panel A corresponds to Panel D of
Figure 6, and Panel B corresponds to Panel D of Figure 7. Column 3 reports the difference between the
coefficients in Columns 2 and 1.




                                                  37

                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Table 3. Estimated Impacts on Ancient Port Grid Cells from Harbor Loss and
         Nearby Ancient Port Grid Cells Losing Their Natural Harbor

                                         Modern Port      Ln Population       Urban             City
                                          Structure          Density         Density          Density
                                              (1)               (2)             (3)              (4)
 No Harbor                                  -0.383            -0.269          -0.050           -0.017
                                           (0.016)           (0.099)         (0.019)          (0.008)

 Surrounding Share with No Harbor           -0.039            0.973           0.134            0.041
                                           (0.039)           (0.225)         (0.044)          (0.020)

 Outcome Mean                               0.467             4.721           0.267            0.024
                                           [0.499]           [2.162]         [0.443]          [0.154]

 Observations                               4,198            4,198            4,198            4,198

Notes: This table shows effects on ancient port grid cells from losing their own natural harbor and nearby
ancient port grid cells losing their natural harbor. These coefficients are estimated and reported jointly,
following equation 3, for the effect of having no modern natural harbor and “Surrounding Share with No
Harbor” that refers to the share of ancient port grid cells within 5-50km that have no modern natural
harbor. This sample is restricted to grid cells with an ancient port, within 50km of the coast, that also
have at least one other ancient port grid cell within 5-50km.
   Column 1 reports effects on having a “Modern Port Structure,” which is an indicator for satellite-visible
human-made structures to assist the loading and unloading of boats (including a basic pier). Column 2
reports effects on log population density of each grid cell, Column 3 reports effects on “Urban Density”
(log population density > 6), and Column 4 reports effects on “City Density” (log population density > 9).
   All estimates control for the number of other ancient port grid cells within 5-50km and the baseline
controls for grid cell characteristics: log distance to the coast, log distance to the nearest major river,
latitude, longitude, terrain ruggedness (standard deviation of elevations within the grid cell), and average
temperature and precipitation in both January and July. In parentheses are robust standard errors
clustered by 1/12-degree-by-1/12-degree groups (roughly 8km-by-8km in the middle of our sample region).
For the outcome means, standard deviations are reported in square brackets.




                                                     38

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
                 Online Appendix
  Identifying Agglomeration Shadows:
Long-run Evidence from Ancient Ports


                    Richard Hornbeck
                   University of Chicago

                    Guy Michaels
              London School of Economics

                    Ferdinand Rauch
                 University of Heidelberg


                         June 2024




Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
A     Data Appendix
A.1    Ancient Ports Data
The database on ancient port locations comes from de Graauw (2019). Our use of “ancient”
refers to a period around 1,500-3,500 years ago, largely in the Classical World, and limited
to the Mediterranean and surrounding areas. The term “port” refers to artificial structures
to assist the loading and unloading of boats. De Graauw geo-located these ports based
on ancient and modern sources, including the Barrington Atlas, Pleiades dataset, and the
Digital Atlas of the Roman Empire (DARE). A large majority of these ancient ports are
Greek and Roman. These ancient ports are locations that were used by seafarers sailing over
long distances, rather than locations for local fishermen who may have landed their boats
on beaches.
    The artificial nature of a port distinguishes it from a harbor (or harbour in British
English), which is a place where maritime vessels can seek shelter. Almost all of the ancient
ports cataloged by de Graauw (2019) are presumed to have been constructed in locations
that had a natural harbor. We received from de Graauw a list of 22 known open-water
ports from his database that relied more on human-made protections from the sea, which
we sometimes exclude from our analysis. We also sometimes exclude 216 locations that de
Graauw is less certain of their use as ancient ports.
    Some natural harbors have disappeared due to natural processes over the many centuries
since those ancient times. The most common of these natural processes was silting and
coastal drift, though in some places sinking and land rising also occurred.
    We employed the firm Digital Divide Data (DDD) to extract visual information on the
modern locations of the ancient ports. We obtained a satellite image for each ancient port
location, using Google Maps, and DDD recorded information visible in these images. The
main variables constructed this way are indicators for a natural harbor in the vicinity of each
ancient port location (within approximately 1km); modern port structures in that location;
and whether these modern port structures (where they exist) are extensive structures, as
opposed to basic ones (e.g., a simple pier).
A.2    Other Data Sources
We obtain population data from the NASA Center for International Earth Science Infor-
mation Network (CIESIN, 2018). We use data for 2015, obtained from Version 4, Revision
11 of the Gridded Population of the World dataset (GPWv4) by CIESIN, with robustness
analysis using data for 2000 from CIESIN’s earlier Global Rural-Urban Mapping Project,
Version 1 (CIESIN, 2011). Both of these datasets provide estimates of population density
for a grid of 30 arc seconds, a resolution that is slightly finer than our main 1km-by-1km

                                                 1

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
grid, which we discuss below.
    We also use two datasets from the “Global Human Settlement Layer” (GHSL). For data
on modern cities, we use the GHS Urban Centre Database, which has coordinates of city
centers, total population, and geographic areas in 2015 (Florczyk et al., 2019). These GHSL
data capture the location and geographic extent of modern cities, but rely on defined ge-
ographic boundaries of cities and so are more dependent on those chosen administrative
boundaries as compared to the more-flexible GPWv4 population density data. We also
obtain the “GHS population grid” dataset for 2015 population (Schiavina, Freire, and Mac-
Manus, 2019), which provides an alternative measure of grid-level population density but
also with a focus on defined “built-up” areas.
    We use maps from ESRI for the coastline, river locations, and modern country borders
(Esri Atlas, 2014; Esri Data and Maps, 2010). We use these maps to assign grid cells to
their country and to calculate distance to the coast. An indicator for deserts comes from the
NASA Earth Observatory land cover map (NASA Earth Observatory, 2020), and elevation
data come from the Global Digital Elevation Model Version 3 (NASA and METI, 2019).
    Other data on grid cells’ geographic characteristics comes from several sources. We
obtain data on temperature and precipitation from the WorldClim 2 Database (Fick and
Hijmans, 2017). We use the 10-year averages of temperature and precipitation in January
and July. For a small share of cells with missing temperature and precipitation, we compute
a distance-weighted measure of the temperature and precipitation of their neighbors using
inverse distance weighted (IDW) interpolation. We use data on terrain ruggedness, based
on the standard deviation of elevations, from Nunn and Puga (2012). We obtain data on
crop suitability from FAO-GAEZ (IIASA/FAO, 2012).21 We obtain crop suitability data for
wheat, barley, olives, cowpeas, white potatoes, and chickpeas. We construct our measure of
sea bounty with the Aquamaps data for 15 fish species’ suitability (Kaschner et al., 2019),
reconstructing the bounty of the sea index in Dalgaard, Knudsen, and Selaya (2020).
    We use mapped ancient locations from the Barrington Atlas (Talbert, 2000), using the
database of cities compiled by Hanson (2016) based on the Barrington data. These cover
the cities of the Roman Empire between 100 B.C. and A.D. 300. For the locations of Roman
roads, we use data from the Digital Atlas of Roman and Medieval Civilizations (McCormick
et al., 2013).
  21
     We measure crop suitability as the agro-climatic potential yield of each crop in dry weight kilogram per
hectare, with historical data for 1961-1990 from CRUTS32, assuming rain-fed water supply and low input
levels.




                                                     2

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
A.3     Grid Construction
We merge the above datasets into an equal area grid of 1km2 cells using the Lambert Az-
imuthal Equal Area projection, where we place the reference point in the (approximate)
center of the Mediterranean at coordinates 39N and 18.5E (following Bakker et al. (2021)).
While these grid cells are all 1km2 in area, they are only approximately 1km-by-1km squares
in two dimensions, and so we measure all distances in the paper using grid cell centroid co-
ordinates and their geodesic distances. By construction, there are no measurable distortions
of distance or angle in the vicinity of the reference point. Even at the Western end of the
Mediterranean (at Gibraltar), the distance between grid cell centroids deviates less than 2%
from 1km.
    To construct our sample of ancient ports, we begin with the ancient ports database
(de Graauw, 2019), which covers ancient ports around the Mediterranean, the European
Atlantic, the Black Sea, the Red Sea, the Gulf of Aden, the Gulf of Oman, the Persian Gulf,
and a few nearby coastal areas. Of the 4,561 ancient ports in the de Graauw dataset, we
exclude 134 as the cumulative result of three geographic exclusion criteria. First, following
exchanges with de Graauw, we exclude a few isolated ancient ports in areas where the
coverage is sparse (and most likely incomplete).22 Second, we exclude ancient ports that are
assigned to a broad area, such as “Ireland” or “Corsica”, rather than to specific coordinates.
Third, since we focus on analyzing coastal areas, we exclude ancient ports that are more
than 50km from the coast.23
    We match each ancient port and Barrington city location to a grid cell, based on its
nearest grid cell centroid (up to 1.5km away), to allow for slight imprecision in coastal maps
and location coordinates. Due to small differences in coastal boundaries across datasets,
for grid cells with an ancient port or Barrington city and missing population density, we
use the mean population density of its “king’s neighbor” grid cells with non-missing values.
Following this adjustment, there are 4,333 ancient ports in grid cells with population density.
A small number of grid cells contain multiple ancient ports, such that there are 4,263 grid
cells with an ancient port and population density.24 For Table 1, we use an indicator for
that grid cell having any ancient port. For the Figures and Table 2, we classify the grid cell
as having a natural harbor if any location within that grid cell has a natural harbor. For
  22
     This omits four isolated ancient ports along the German, Scandinavian, and Baltic coasts to the east of
Amsterdam. We also exclude one isolated port in Iceland. Along the West African Coast, we restrict the
analysis to locations from the Canary Islands northwards. Along the East African coast, we exclude ports
south of the Gulf of Aden. We include the coast of the Indian Ocean going east until we reach India.
  23
     The excluded inland ports were mostly along the Nile and its delta and a few other major rivers.
  24
     There are 4,204 grid cells in our sample with one ancient port, 51 grid cells with two ports, 6 grid cells
with three ports, 1 grid cell with four ports, and one grid cell with 5 ports, bringing the number of port grid
cells to 4,263.


                                                      3

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Table 3, similarly, we use an indicator for that grid cell having any modern port structure.
    Across our broader sample region, we calculate the distance from each grid cell to its
nearest ancient port, with and without a modern natural harbor, and exclude grid cells that
are further than 200km from an ancient port. To calculate the distance from each grid cell to
the nearest river, coast, and Roman road, we compute the shortest geodesic distance between
features and the grid cell centroid.25 We exclude grid cells more than 50km from the coast.
We also restrict the grid cells to modern countries that have at least one ancient port, which
means our grid cells follow the coastlines and end at the borders of Netherlands-Germany,
India-Pakistan, and Ireland-UK, as well as at the same dividing lines in the Atlantic Maghreb
and Somalia.




  25
     For other data, we overlay the input maps with the grid cells database and take the values that each
grid cell centroid falls on.


                                                   4

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Appendix References
Bakker, Jan David, Stephan Maurer, Jörn-Steffen Pischke, and Ferdinand Rauch.
 2021. “Of Mice and Merchants: Connectedness and the Location of Economic Activity in the
 Iron Age.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 103(4): 652–665.

Center for International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN). 2011. “Global
 Rural-Urban Mapping Project (GRUMPv1): Population Density Grid.” Palisades, NY: NASA
 Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center. Version 1. Accessed 2021.

Center for International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN). 2018. “Gridded
 Population of the World (GPWv4): Population Density.” Palisades, NY: NASA Socioeconomic
 Data and Applications Center. Version 4, Revision 11. Accessed 2021.

Dalgaard, Carl-Johan, Anne Sofie B. Knudsen, and Pablo Selaya. 2020. “The Bounty of
 the Sea and Long-Run Development.” Journal of Economic Growth, 25(3): 259–295.

de Graauw, Arthur. 2019. “The Catalogue of Ancient Coastal Settlements, Ports and Harbours.”
  Accessed 2019. https://www.ancientportsantiques.com/.

Esri Atlas. 2014. “World Boundaries and Places.” Redlands, CA: Environmental Systems Research
  Institute (ESRI), ArcGIS Living Atlas of the World. Accessed April 2018.

Esri Data and Maps. 2010. “World Major Rivers.” Redlands, CA: Environmental Systems Re-
  search Institute (ESRI) Mapping Center, ArcGIS Living Atlas of the World. Accessed 2019.

Fick, Stephen E., and Robert J. Hijmans. 2017. “WorldClim 2: New 1km Spatial Resolution
  Climate Surfaces for Global Land Areas.” International Journal of Climatology 37 (12): 4302-
  4315. Accessed January 2020.

Florczyk, A., C. Corbane, M. Schiavina, M. Pesaresi, L. Maffenini, M. Melchiorri, P.
  Politis, F. Sabo, S. Freire, D. Ehrlich, T. Kemper, P. Tommasi, D. Airaghi, and L.
  Zanchetta. 2019. “GHS-UCDB R2019A: GHS Urban Centre Database 2015, Multitemporal and
  Multidimensional Attributes.” Brussels: European Commission, Joint Research Centre (JRC),
  Global Human Settlement Layer (GHSL). Accessed 2021.

Hanson, J.W. 2016. “Cities Database.” Oxford: Oxford Roman Economy Project (OXREP).
 Version 1.0. Accessed July 2020. http://www.romaneconomy.ox.ac.uk/.

International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) and Food and Agricul-
  ture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). 2020. “Global Agro-Ecological Zones
  (GAEZ).” Laxenburg, Austria: IIASA; Rome: FAO. Version 4.0. Accessed June 2024.

Kaschner, K., K. Kesner-Reyes, C. Garilao, J. Segschneider, T. Rius-Barile, J. Rees,
 and R. Froese. 2019. “AquaMaps: Predicted Range Maps for Aquatic Species.” Accessed May
 2024.

McCormick, Michael, Guoping Huang, Giovanni Zambotti, and Jessica Lavash. 2013.
 “Roman Road Network.” Cambridge, MA: Digital Atlas of Roman and Medieval Civilizations
 (DARMC). Version 2008. Accessed September 2019. https://darmc.harvard.edu/.



                                                5

                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), and Ministry of Economy,
 Trade, and Industry (METI) of Japan. 2019. “Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission
 and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER) Global Digital Elevation Model Version 3 (GDEM 003).”
 NASA Earthdata. Accessed June, 2024. https://asterweb.jpl.nasa.gov/gdem.asp.

National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Earth Observatory. 2020.
 “Land Cover Classification Map.” NASA Earth Observing System Data and Information
 System (EOSDIS) Land Processes Distributed Active Archive Center. Accessed July 2020.
 https://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/.

Nunn, Nathan, and Diego Puga. 2012. “Ruggedness: The Blessing of Bad Geography in
 Africa.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(1): 20–36. Accessed replication data September
 2019. https://diegopuga.org/data/rugged/.

Schiavina, Marcello, Sergio Freire, and Kytt MacManus. 2019. “GHS-POP R2019A - GHS
  Population Grid Multitemporal (1975-2015).” Brussels: European Commission, Joint Research
  Centre (JRC), Global Human Settlement Layer (GHSL). Accessed 2021.

Talbert, Richard L.A., ed. 2000. Barrington Atlas of the Greek and Roman World. Princeton,
  NJ: Princeton University Press.




                                                 6

                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Figure A.1. Share of Instances with Cities by Distance and Population Density
Panel A. Medium Density City, or Greater          Panel B. High Density City




Notes: This figure shows the share of instances in which there is a city at the indicated distance from a
starting city, as modeled for the 16 aggregate population parameter values in Fujita, Krugman, and Mori
(1999). Panel A shows the share of instances with a city of medium density, defined as a city with log
population density > 2, where location is binned to the nearest 0.005. Panel B shows the share of instances
with a city of high density, defined as a city with log population density > 3.




                                                    7

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Figure A.2. Share of Instances with Cities by Distance and Population Density,
            with Increasing Spatial Noise
Panel A. Medium Density City, Low Noise          Panel B. High Density City, Low Noise




Panel C. Medium Density City, Medium             Panel D. High Density City, Medium Noise
         Noise




Panel E. Medium Density City, High Noise         Panel F. High Density City, High Noise




Notes: Each panel reports simulations from Figure A.1, with increasing spatial noise in the fixed starting
city’s location (at distance zero in Figure A.1): “Low Noise” (standard deviation of 0.25); “Medium Noise”
(standard deviation of 0.5); and “High Noise” (standard deviation of 1.0).




                                                    8

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Figure A.3. Share of Instances with Cities by Distance and Population
            Density: Medium versus High Noise
Panel A. Medium Density City, Medium and Panel B. High Density City, Medium and
         High Noise                               High Noise




Panel C. Medium Density City, Difference        Panel D. High Density City, Difference
         between Medium and High Noise                   between Medium and High Noise




Notes: This figure compares “Medium Noise” and “High Noise” results from the simulations in Figure A.2.
Panels A and B show simulations with Medium and High Noise on the same plot, and Panels C and D
show the difference in probabilities (Medium Noise minus High Noise).




                                                  9

                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Figure A.4. Number of Grid Cells by Distance to Nearest Ancient Port, by
            Modern Harbor Type
Panel A. Distance to Nearest Ancient Port with Harbor




Panel B. Distance to Nearest Ancient Port without Harbor




Notes: This figure shows the number of grid cells by distance to nearest ancient port. For each integer
kilometer, Panel A shows the number of grid cells at that nearest distance from an ancient port with a
natural harbor in the modern era, and Panel B shows the number of grid cells at that distance from a port
without a natural harbor in the modern era. We classify a location as having a natural harbor in the
modern era if at least one ancient port location at that grid cell is classified as having a natural harbor
using satellite imagery. Our sample is restricted to grid cells within 200km of an ancient port, and
truncated from this figure are: 2.8% of grid cells that are more than 200km from an ancient port with a
modern harbor, and 5.4% of grid cells are more than 200km from an ancient port without a modern harbor.



                                                    10

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Figure A.5. Impacts on Probability of City Density, Robustness to Additional
            Geographic Characteristics
Panel A. Probability of City Density               Panel B. Probability of City Density




Panel C. Differences for City Density              Panel D. City, Difference from Log Fit




Notes: This figure reproduces estimates from Figures 6 and 7 with additional geographic controls for grid
cell characteristics: suitability for potatoes, wheat, barley, cowpeas, olives, and chickpeas; sea bounty; an
indicator for desert cell; an indicator for being on an island; elevation; log distance to river mouth; sea
bounty interacted within being 2km, 5km, and 10km of the coast; indicators for being within 2km, 5km,
and 10km of a coast, a major river, and a river mouth. Panels A and B correspond to Figure 6, Panels B
and D. Panels B and D correspond to Figure 7, Panels B and D.




                                                     11

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Figure A.6. Impacts on Probability of City Density, Robustness to Excluding
            Islands
Panel A. Probability of City Density              Panel B. Probability of City Density




Panel C. Differences for City Density             Panel D. City, Difference from Log Fit




Notes: This figure reproduces estimates from Figures 6 and 7, removing all grid cells on an island smaller
than 2,500 square kilometers. Panels A and B correspond to Figure 6, Panels B and D. Panels B and D
correspond to Figure 7, Panels B and D.




                                                    12

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Figure A.7. Impacts on Probability of City Density, Robustness to Excluding
            “Potential Ancient Harbors”
Panel A. Probability of City Density              Panel B. Probability of City Density




Panel C. Differences for City Density             Panel D. City, Difference from Log Fit




Notes: This figure reproduces estimates from Figures 6 and 7, excluding 216 locations where de Graauw is
less certain of their use as ancient ports. Panels A and B correspond to Figure 6, Panels B and D. Panels B
and D correspond to Figure 7, Panels B and D.




                                                    13

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Figure A.8. Impacts on Probability of City Density, Robustness to Ancient
            Economic Characteristics
Panel A. Probability of City Density             Panel B. Probability of City Density




Panel C. Differences for City Density            Panel D. City, Difference from Log Fit




Notes: This figure reproduces estimates from Figures 6 and 7, with additional controls for grid cell
characteristics in the ancient era: log distance to nearest Roman road and log distance to each Barrington
1 city (Talbert, 2000; Hanson, 2016): Aelia Capitolina (Jerusalem); Alexandria; Antioch (Antakya);
Athens; Byzantium (Istanbul); Carthage; Córdoba; Corinth; Leptis Magna; Lugdunum (Lyon);
Mediolanum (Milan); Rome; Tarraco (Tarragona); and Thessalonica. Panels A and B correspond to Figure
6, Panels B and D. Panels B and D correspond to Figure 7, Panels B and D.




                                                   14

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Figure A.9. Impacts on Probability of City Density, Robustness to Excluding
            Ancient Open-Water Ports
Panel A. Probability of City Density            Panel B. Probability of City Density




Panel C. Differences for City Density           Panel D. City, Difference from Log Fit




Notes: This figure reproduces estimates from Figures 6 and 7, removing all grid cells within 20km of 22
ancient open-water ports (those that are known to have relied on human-made protections from the sea).
Panels A and B correspond to Figure 6, Panels B and D. Panels B and D correspond to Figure 7, Panels B
and D.




                                                  15

                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Figure A.10. Impacts on Probability of City Density, Robustness to Excluding
             Barrington 1 Cities
Panel A. Probability of City Density            Panel B. Probability of City Density




Panel C. Differences for City Density           Panel D. City, Difference from Log Fit




Notes: This figure reproduces estimates from Figures 6 and 7, removing all grid cells within 20km of 14
Barrington 1 Cities (Talbert, 2000; Hanson, 2016): Aelia Capitolina (Jerusalem); Alexandria; Antioch
(Antakya); Athens; Byzantium (Istanbul); Carthage; Córdoba; Corinth; Leptis Magna; Lugdunum (Lyon);
Mediolanum (Milan); Rome; Tarraco (Tarragona); and Thessalonica. Panels A and B correspond to Figure
6, Panels B and D. Panels B and D correspond to Figure 7, Panels B and D.




                                                  16

                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Figure A.11. Impacts on Probability of City Density, Robustness to 2-Degree
             by 2-Degree Fixed Effects
Panel A. Probability of City Density              Panel B. Probability of City Density




Panel C. Differences for City Density             Panel D. City, Difference from Log Fit




Notes: This figure reproduces estimates from Figures 6 and 7, adding fixed effects for 2-degree by 2-degree
grid cell groupings. Panels A and B correspond to Figure 6, Panels B and D. Panels B and D correspond
to Figure 7, Panels B and D.




                                                    17

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Figure A.12. Impacts on Probability of City Density, Robustness to Modern
             Country Fixed Effects
Panel A. Probability of City Density              Panel B. Probability of City Density




Panel C. Differences for City Density             Panel D. City, Difference from Log Fit




Notes: This figure reproduces estimates from Figures 6 and 7, adding fixed effects for present-day country.
Panels A and B correspond to Figure 6, Panels B and D. Panels B and D correspond to Figure 7, Panels B
and D.




                                                    18

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Figure A.13. Coefficient Differences, Across Population Density Thresholds
Panel A. Ln(Density) > 5                         Panel B. Ln(Density) > 6




Panel C. Ln(Density) > 7                         Panel D. Ln(Density) > 8




Panel E. Ln(Density) > 9                         Panel F. Ln(Density) > 10




Notes: This figure shows the differences between the harbor and no harbor estimates of the effect of
distance on different log population density thresholds. Panels B and E match Panels C and D of Figure 6,
and the other panels report results for alternate log population density cutoff values from 5 to 10.




                                                   19

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Figure A.14. Differences from Log Fit, Across Population Density Thresholds
Panel A. Ln(Density) > 5                          Panel B. Ln(Density) > 6




Panel C. Ln(Density) > 7                          Panel D. Ln(Density) > 8




Panel E. Ln(Density) > 9                          Panel F. Ln(Density) > 10




Notes: This figure shows differences between the log fit and the estimated effects of distance on different
log population density levels, for distances to ports both with and without modern harbors. Panels B and
E match Panels C and D of Figure 7, and the other panels report results for alternate log population
density cutoff values from 5 to 10.




                                                    20

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Figure A.15. Impacts on Probability of City Density, Robustness to 2000
             GRUMP Data
Panel A. Probability of City Density            Panel B. Probability of City Density




Panel C. Differences for City Density           Panel D. City, Difference from Log Fit




Notes: This figure reproduces estimates from Figures 6 and 7, using population per square kilometer
estimates for 2000 from the earlier GRUMP model (CIESIN, 2011). Panels A and B correspond to Figure
6, Panels B and D. Panels B and D correspond to Figure 7, Panels B and D.




                                                  21

                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Figure A.16. Impacts on Probability of City Density, Robustness to GHSL
             Density Data
Panel A. Probability of City Density            Panel B. Probability of City Density




Panel C. Differences for City Density           Panel D. City, Difference from Log Fit




Notes: This figure reproduces estimates from Figures 6 and 7, using population per square kilometer
estimates for 2015 from the GHSL-POP model (Schiavina, Freire, and MacManus, 2019). Panels A and B
correspond to Figure 6, Panels B and D. Panels B and D correspond to Figure 7, Panels B and D.




                                                  22

                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Figure A.17. Impacts on Probability of City Density, Robustness to GHSL
             City Location Data
Panel A. Probability of City Density                Panel B. Probability of City Density




Panel C. Differences for City Density               Panel D. City, Difference from Log Fit




Notes: This figure reproduces estimates from Figures 6 and 7, using an alternative
                                                                             p        outcome of being within
a city. We define a grid cell as within a city if it is within the “radius” ( Area/π) of a city center location,
for cities over 500,000 people, using 2015 area and population estimates from the GHS Urban Centre
Database (Florczyk et al., 2019). Panels A and B correspond to Figure 6, Panels B and D. Panels B and D
correspond to Figure 7, Panels B and D.




                                                      23

                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Figure A.18. Impacts on Probability of City Density, Robustness to Two-Way
             Clustered Standard Errors with Shifted Clusters
Panel A. Probability of City Density             Panel B. Probability of City Density




Panel C. Differences for City Density            Panel D. City, Difference from Log Fit




Notes: This figure reproduces estimates from Figures 6 and 7, with the estimation of standard errors using
two-way clusters with additional clusters shifted by 1/24 degree latitude and 1/24 degree longitude from
baseline. Panels A and B correspond to Figure 6, Panels B and D. Panels B and D correspond to Figure 7,
Panels B and D.




                                                   24

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Figure A.19. Impacts on Probability of City Density, Robustness to Clustering
             by 1/4-Degree by 1/4-Degree Squares
Panel A. Probability of City Density              Panel B. Probability of City Density




Panel C. Differences for City Density             Panel D. City, Difference from Log Fit




Notes: This figure reproduces estimates from Figures 6 and 7, with standard errors clustered instead at the
level of 1/4-degree-by-1/4-degree groups. Panels A and B correspond to Figure 6, Panels B and D. Panels
B and D correspond to Figure 7, Panels B and D.




                                                    25

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Figure A.20. Impacts on Probability of City Density, Robustness to Using
             Conley Standard Errors with 4km Cutoff
Panel A. Probability of City Density              Panel B. Probability of City Density




Panel C. Differences for City Density             Panel D. City, Difference from Log Fit




Notes: This figure reproduces estimates from Figures 6 and 7, instead using Conley standard errors
(Conley, 1999) that allow for spatial correlation that declines linearly in distance up to a 4km cutoff. By
comparison, the median size city in our sample has a radius of 4km. Panels A and B correspond to Figure
6, Panels B and D. Panels B and D correspond to Figure 7, Panels B and D.




                                                    26

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
Figure A.21. Impacts on Probability of City Density, Robustness to Using
             Conley Standard Errors with 8km Cutoff
Panel A. Probability of City Density              Panel B. Probability of City Density




Panel C. Differences for City Density             Panel D. City, Difference from Log Fit




Notes: This figure reproduces estimates from Figures 6 and 7, instead using Conley standard errors
(Conley, 1999) that allow for spatial correlation that declines linearly in distance up to an 8km cutoff. By
comparison, the median size city in our sample has a radius of 4km. Panels A and B correspond to Figure
6, Panels B and D. Panels B and D correspond to Figure 7, Panels B and D.




                                                     27

                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4889236
