[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: official-document/M03-dijkstra-poelman-veneri-2019-the-eu-oecd-definition-of-a-functional-urban-area-10.1787-d58cb34d-en.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Title:           The EU-OECD definition of a functional urban area (EN)
Subject:         https://doi.org/10.1787/d58cb34d-en
Keywords:        Functional Urban Area, City, Metropolitan area, Delineation
Author:          Lewis Dijkstra (European Commission), Hugo Poelman (European Commission), Paolo Veneri (OECD)
Creator:         OECD Publishing Systems
Producer:        PDFsharp 1.50.5147 (www.pdfsharp.com) (Original: Microsoft® Word 2016)
CreationDate:    Mon Dec  9 23:43:48 2019 WIB
ModDate:         Fri May 16 06:32:08 2025 WIB
Custom Metadata: yes
Metadata Stream: no
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            none
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           19
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       595.276 x 841.89 pts (A4)
Page rot:        0
File size:       2722712 bytes
Optimized:       no
PDF version:     1.4
[Extracted Text]
    OECD Regional Development Working Papers 2019/11

                                          Lewis Dijkstra,
 The EU-OECD definition
                                         Hugo Poelman,
of a functional urban area
                                               Paolo Veneri
                                  https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/d58cb34d-en
            OECD Regional Development Working Papers




          The EU-OECD Definition of a
            Functional Urban Area
       By: Lewis Dijkstra, Hugo Poelman, Paolo
                         Veneri


    This paper describes the EU-OECD method to define functional urban areas
    (FUAs). Being composed of a city and its commuting zone, FUAs encompass the
    economic and functional extent of cities based on daily people’s movements. The
    paper first presents briefly the methodological approach and subsequently
    provides a detailed description of the identification algorithm, together with the
    data needed to apply it. This definition has been applied to 33 OECD member
    countries and Colombia, as well as to all European Union member countries.




JEL codes: O18, P25, R23, R58
Keywords: Functional Urban Area, City, Metropolitan area, Delineation




PUBE




  European Commission, Department for Regional and Urban Policy.

  European Commission, Department for Regional and Urban Policy.

  OECD Centre for Entrepreneurship, SMEs, Regions and Cities.
2



ABOUT THE OECD
The OECD is a multi-disciplinary inter-governmental organisation of 36 member countries
which engages in its work an increasing number of non-members from all regions of the
world.
The Organisation’s core mission today is to help governments work together towards a
stronger, cleaner, fairer global economy. Through its network of 250 specialised
committees and working groups, the OECD provides a setting where governments
compare policy experiences, seek answers to common problems, identify good practice,
and co-ordinate domestic and international policies. More information available at:
www.oecd.org.


ABOUT OECD REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT WORKING PAPERS
Working papers from the Regional Development Policy Division of the OECD cover a full
range of topics including regional statistics and analysis, urban governance and
economics, rural governance and economics, and multi-level governance. Depending on
the programme of work, the papers can cover specific topics such as regional innovation
and networks, the determinants of regional growth or fiscal consolidation at the sub-
national level. OECD Regional Development Working Papers are published on
http://www.oecd.org/cfe/regional-policy.

OECD Working Papers should not be reported as representing the official views of the
OECD or of its member countries. The opinions expressed and arguments employed are
those of the author(s).

Working Papers describe preliminary results or research in progress by the author(s) and
are published to stimulate discussion on a broad range of issues on which the OECD
works. Comments on Working Papers are welcome, and may be sent to the Centre for
Entrepreneurship, SMEs, Regions and Cities, OECD, 2 rue André-Pascal, 75775 Paris
Cedex 16, France.

This paper is authorised for publication by Lamia Kamal-Chaoui, Director, Centre for
Entrepreneurship, SMEs, Regions and Cities, OECD.

This document, as well as any statistical data and map included herein, are without
prejudice to the status of or sovereignty over any territory, to the delimitation of
international frontiers and boundaries and to the name of any territory, city or area.




© OECD 2019
You can copy, download or print OECD content for your own use, and you can include excerpts from OECD
publications, databases and multimedia products in your own documents, presentations, blogs, websites and
teaching materials, provided that suitable acknowledgement of OECD as source and copyright owner is given.
All requests for public or commercial use and translation rights should be submitted to rights@oecd.org.



                                For contacts: paolo.veneri@oecd.org
3




Table of contents
    1. Introduction ......................................................................................................................... 4
    2. The short definition ........................................................................................................... 5
       2.1. Definition of an urban centre ....................................................................................... 5
       2.2. Definition of a city.......................................................................................................... 6
       2.3. Definition of a Commuting Zone ................................................................................. 7
    3. Detailed methodology ....................................................................................................... 9
       3.1. Defining an urban centre ............................................................................................. 9
       3.2. Defining a city .............................................................................................................. 10
       A city has two urban centres ............................................................................................. 11
       An urban centre covers two distinct cities....................................................................... 11
       3.3. What is a greater city? ............................................................................................... 12
       3.4. Defining a commuting zone ....................................................................................... 12
       Checking for connected cities: the polycentricity check ............................................... 12
       Creating the commuting zone ........................................................................................... 13
    4. What local units to use?................................................................................................. 13
       4.1. Large units may lead to the over-, under- or non-representation of an urban
       centre by a city .................................................................................................................... 13
       4.2. Small units may lead to a loss of the link to the city government or to less
       statistical data...................................................................................................................... 14
       4.3. Adjusting the city to ensure a better representation of the urban centre or a
       better link to local government .......................................................................................... 15
       4.4. Cities without an urban centre .................................................................................. 16
    5. Terminology ...................................................................................................................... 17
    References ............................................................................................................................. 18
    Annex I. Overview of the FUAs per country .................................................................. 18
4


1. Introduction

Comparing cities in different countries is a challenging task. National definitions of cities are rarely
consistent across countries and they rely on administrative or legal boundaries that do not
necessarily reflect the functional and economic extent of cities. One main problem that emerges
when comparing cities using national definitions is that the size of local units – i.e. administrative
or legal units identifying city boundaries formally – can be starkly different across countries. Such
differences potentially biases international comparative analyses through the modifiable areas unit
problem (Openshaw, 1977).
Making sound international comparisons of cities requires using units of comparable size.
However, there are also other aspects to consider, primarily related to the concept that scholars
and policy makers use to understand cities, their evolution and economic performance. For
simplicity, we can identify two main different but complementary concepts to describe the extent of
cities. The first encompasses the space covered by an area of high population density with a
minimum size of population. Such a definition, which we call ‘city’ from now on, accounts only for
the agglomeration of people in space using a consistent threshold of density and total population.
A second concept considers the functional and economic extent of cities, beyond the consideration
of density and population size only. Such concept includes also other lower density areas
surrounding the city but closely linked to the latter from an economic and functional point of view.
We call this second concept ‘Functional Urban Area’ (FUA). A FUA is composed of a ‘city’ and its
surrounding, less densely populated local units that are part of the city’s labour market (‘commuting
zone’).
The European Union and the OECD have jointly developed a methodology to define functional
urban areas in a consistent way across countries (Dijkstra and Poelman 2012, OECD, 2012). This
paper describes such methodology in detail so that it can be replicated in any country once the
necessary information is available.
FUAs are defined in several steps. First, a population grid makes it possible to define ‘urban
centres’ independently from administrative or statistical boundaries. An urban centre is a pure grid-
based concept, a cluster of contiguous cells of high density and with more than 50,000 inhabitants.
This means that an urban centre inside a large local unit and one spread out over multiple local
units could be easily identified using the same approach, something which definitions relying only
on local unit data struggled to do.
Subsequently, this dense, urban centre is adapted to the closest local units to define a city. Next,
commuting flows are used to identify which of the surrounding, less densely populated local units
were part of the city’s labour market (commuting zone). Commuting flows are based on travel to
work i.e. the travel that employed residents in a local unit make to reach the place of work.
However, commuting flows also capture some of the flows to access education, health, culture,
sports or shops.
FUAs are a powerful tool to compare socio-economic and spatial trends in cities and to design
urban development policy. FUAs are better suited than administrative areas to capture
agglomeration economies and they encompass the full extent of the city’s labour market. It can
guide national and city governments when they plan infrastructure, transportation, housing,
schools, and spaces for culture and recreation. In summary, FUAs can trigger a change in the way
policies are planned and implemented by providing the right scale to address issues that affect
both the city and its surrounding commuting zone.
Our definition of urban centres, cities and FUAs is people-based because it only uses density and
size of population and the daily mobility of the latter. It is not a definition based on built-up area or
morphology. Historically, the data on buildings, i.e. maps, had a higher spatial resolution than the
population data. The indirect approach of using building data to identify population centres is no
longer necessary as the population grid provides the needed spatial resolution. Furthermore, built-
up area per capita varies between cities of different sizes, between developed and less developed
5


countries and tends to grow over time. These three aspects reduce the comparability of definitions
using built-up area between cities, countries and over time.
The EU-OECD functional urban area definition is linked to the ‘degree of urbanisation’ (Eurostat,
2018). Both use the identical city definition, but the degree of urbanisation classifies the remaining
local units into towns & suburbs, and rural areas. Both definitions are included in the amended
European NUTS regulation (REGULATION (EU) 2017/2391).
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. Section 2 provides a short description of the
method to identify FUAs. Section 3 describes the methodology in more detail. Section 4 discusses
what local units to use and the issues linked to this choice. Section 5 lists the terminology used in
this definition.
A separate Annex provides the detailed list of all FUAs in all EU and OECD countries, with a map
showing FUA boundaries in each country.


2. The short definition

A functional urban area can be defined in four steps:
         1) Identify an urban centre: a set of contiguous, high density (1,500 residents per square
            kilometre) grid cells with a population of 50,000 in the contiguous cells;
         2) Identify a city: one or more local units that have at least 50% of their residents inside
            an urban centre;
         3) Identify a commuting zone: a set of contiguous local units that have at least 15% of
            their employed residents working in the city;
         4) A functional urban area is the combination of the city with its commuting zone.

Figure 1 shows visually the different concepts that are used in the method and that compose a
FUA, notably the urban centre, the city, and the commuting zone.


Figure 1. Urban centre, city, commuting zone and functional urban area of Graz, Austria




Applying this definition requires the following data sources:
    ●    A residential population grid with the number of people per cell of 1-square kilometre and
         the share of land in each cell;
    ●    Digital boundaries of the local units;
    ●    Commuting flows between the local units and number of employed residents per local unit.

2.1. Definition of an urban centre

The first step focuses on the concentration of population in space, which is the simplest and most
uncontroverted feature of a city. It is the starting point of this definition. The idea of a city as a place
with a relatively high concentration of population in space is common to many disciplines that
describe a city including economic, social, cultural and geographical ones.
6


Many national city definitions rely the population size and density of a local unit. This causes two
types of problems. A big city in a large local unit will have a very low or rural population density.
For example, Ulaanbaatar, the capital city of Mongolia, has a population of 1.4 million but only a
density of 270 inhabitants per square kilometre. The population size of a city is difficult to determine
when it is spread out over multiple local units. For example, how many people live in Paris?
An urban centre, as defined in this paper, relies on a population grid which can identify spatial
concentrations of population independently from political or administrative boundaries, using
spatial units of the same shape and size.
An urban centre or high-density cluster is a new spatial concept based on grid cells of 1 square
kilometre. It is defined in three steps, as indicated below and represented in Figure 2.
       ●   Step 1: All grid cells with a density of more than 1,500 inhabitants per square kilometre of
           land are selected.
       ●   Step 2: The contiguous high-density cells are then clustered. Only the clusters with at least
           50,000 inhabitants are kept. To avoid over-aggregation, cells with only the corners
           touching are not considered contiguous.
       ●   Step 3: Gaps in each cluster are filled separately and its edges smoothed (Fig. 2).


Figure 2. High density cells, high density clusters, urban centre in Toulouse, France




2.2. Definition of a city

A city consists of one or more local units with at least 50% of their population in an urban centre.
A local unit can be either administrative or statistical. Examples of administrative units include a
municipality, a district, a neighbourhood or metropolitan area. Some of these administrative units
also play a political role as electoral districts or local government areas. Statistical units can be
enumeration areas, census blocks, census tracts, wards, super output areas, named places or
small areas.
Examples of local units used in OECD countries are communes in France, municipalities in Italy,
sigungu in Korea and Census Subdivisions in Canada. The best local unit for this definition is the
smallest unit for which commuting data is available. 1 Figure 3 shows, visually, the process through
which a ‘city’ is identified by intersecting the grid-based urban centre with local units.




1
    In principle, commuting data at grid level would be another usable option, if available.
7


Figure 3 Share of population in an urban centre in Toulouse, France




2.3. Definition of a Commuting Zone

Once all cities have been defined, commuting zones can be identified using the following steps:
    1) If 15% of employed persons living in one city work in another city, these cities are treated
       as a single destination.
    2) All local units with at least 15% of their employed residents working in a city are identified
       as part of the commuting zone of that city (Figure 4).
    3) Enclaves, i.e. local units entirely surrounded by other local units that belong to a
       commuting zone or a city are included and exclaves or non-contiguous local units are
       dropped (Figure 4, third panel).
A Functional Urban Area consists of the city and its respective commuting zone. It can happen
that, due to a low intensity of commuting flows, there is no commuting zone. In this case, there is
a perfect correspondence between the FUA and the city. The method to delineate FUAs is also
visually summarised in Figure 5.


Figure 4. A city and its commuting zone
8



Figure 5. The algorithm to identify a functional urban area



                                                                              Methodology to define the functional urban areas


                                             Apply the threshold to identify densely populated grid cells                    ≥ 1 500 inhabitants per km2
       STEP 1:
       Create urban centres
                                               Select a cluster of contiguous high-density grid cells
                                                                                                                                 ≥ 50 00 inhabitants
                                              with a total population above the population threshold



                                       Select the local units that have the majority of their residents living in                If 50% of the population of the local
                                                           an urban centre to create a ‘city’                                    unit lives within the urban centre
       STEP 2:
       Create cities                                                                                                             If more than 15% of the population of
                                        Check whether two or more cities will belong to the same functional                      one city commutes to work to another
                                                       urban area (‘polycentricity check’)                                       city. If this applies, those cities will be
                                                                                                                                 treated as a single destination in the
                                                                                                                                 next step.

                                                                                                                                 If more than 15% of the population of a
       STEP 3:                         Select local units that surrounds the city and that are part of its labour                  local unit commutes to work to in the
                                                                       market
       Create commuting                                                                                                                            city
       zones

       STEP 4:                                        Combine the city and its commuting zone
       Create a FUA
                                                                                                              9

3. Detailed methodology

This section describes the methodology in more detail.

3.1. Defining an urban centre

An urban centre is based on a population grid. Many statistical offices already produce their own grid.
For example, the 2011 GEOSTAT grid covers all the EU member states.2 Brazil, Colombia and Egypt
either have their own grid or are developing one. Many more statistical offices will produce an official
population grid by geo-coding their next census. Because these grids are based on points, they are
called bottom up grids. In other words, the grid is created from the bottom up using data with a higher
spatial resolution.
In addition, various institutions provide modelled global population grids that are publicly available. The
Joint Research Centre has produced a global disaggregation grid (GHS-POP) using the Global Human
Settlement Layer (GHSL3) for 2015. It is based on a combination of high-resolution layer of built-up
areas and population data collected by CIESIN (GPW v4). WorldPop 4 has also created a global
residential population.
The method to define an urban centre is the following:
    1) Select all 1-square kilometre grid cells with a density of more than 1,500 residents per square
       kilometre of land (i.e. for each cell the share of land should be calculated by excluding bodies
       of water).
    2) Cluster all contiguous cells above this density threshold using only four points of contiguity, in
       other words do not consider the diagonals. For example, in Figure 6 cells 2, 4, 5 and 7 are
       contiguous with the central cell, while cells 1, 3, 6 and 9 are not considered contiguous.
    3) Remove all clusters with less than 50,000 residents.
    4) Fill the gaps using the majority rule iteratively until no more cells are added. The majority rule
       means that if at least five of the eight cells surrounding a cell are part of the same urban centre,
       this cell is added to that urban centre. The majority rule should be applied to single clusters
       and not to all clusters at once. This rule should be repeated until no more cells are added.
In countries with relatively low-density urban development, a very accurate population grid and a strong
separation of land uses, this approach may lead to an excessive fragmentation of urban centres. In
such places, the grid cells with shopping malls, transport infrastructure or business parks will not reach
the residential density threshold to be included in the urban centre and will create breaks between
adjacent areas that do meet the threshold.




2
  http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/gisco/geodata/reference-data/population-distribution-
demography/geostat
3
  http://ghsl.jrc.ec.europa.eu/
4
  http://www.worldpop.org.uk/
                                                                                                               10
The quality of the population grid also plays a role. In a disaggregation grid, some population would still
be attributed to commercial or industrial areas, where as a bottom-up grid would not. Therefore, this
issue is less likely to occur when using a disaggregation grid.
To resolve this issue, grid cells that are 50% built-up can be added to the urban centre. This resolves
the problem in this specific type of city and has little to no impact on higher density cities, as virtually
all the cells that are 50% built-up have a high enough population density or are added as part of the
gap filling process.
Figure 1: Contiguous grid cells
Figure 6. Contiguous grid cells


     1           2           3


     4                       5


     6           7           8



3.2. Defining a city

In most cases, defining a city is simple. There is a single urban centre located in a single local unit. It
means that all of the urban centre population is located in that local unit and the share of the local unit
population in that urban centre is very high. See figure 7.


Figure 7: High density, cells, urban centre and city of Graz, Austria




However, in some cases the relationship is more complex. We discuss two cases: a) a city contains
more than one urban centre and b) an urban centre covers two distinct cities.
                                                                                                               11
A city has two urban centres

This is the most benign situation. It may be that a wide river, a steep slope or an industrial area has led
to a split in the urban centre. In this case, the local unit simply represents both urban centres. For
example, Budapest has two separate urban centres. They both fall within the same local unit (Figure
8).


Figure 8. Two urban centres can fall in the same local unit, i.e. Budapest, Hungary




An urban centre covers two distinct cities

Some urban centres cover two distinct cities, in the sense of two distinct urban settlements with their
own centre and name. This can happen because these cities have almost grown together but remain
functionally distinct. If the population grid is estimated, that situation might occur because the estimated
population is often more evenly distributed than the actual population.
In some cases, the urban centre can become too big to be plausible as the centre of a daily urban
system, meaning that it is too large to be considered as a space encompassed by the daily movements
of people between residence and work places.
When a single urban centre covers two or more distinct cities, a statistical office can choose to create
multiple cities. For example, Poole and Bournemouth in the United Kingdom share a single urban centre
(see Figure 9) but are two separate cities. Each of these cities, however, should have a population of
at least 50,000. If there is at least a one-way commuting flow of more than 15% between these two
cities, they should have joint commuting zone and therefore being part of the same FUA. If, instead,
there is less than 15% of commuting between the two cities, those two cities could be kept separate.
                                                                                                                12
Figure 9. High density cells, urban centre, local units and cities




3.3. What is a greater city?

In some cases, an urban centre stretches far beyond the boundaries of the central local unit that gives
it its name. This is often the case for (large) capital cities that have outgrown the small central local
unit, such as Athens, Copenhagen, Paris and Valletta. To avoid the confusion the pre-fix ‘greater’ is
often added to the name. This is already common practice in several countries, see for example Greater
London, Greater Dublin, Grand Paris etc.
The EU-OECD FUA definition ensures that the most comparable boundaries are selected. It does this
by first defining an urban centre independently from administrative boundaries and only in a second
step identifying the administrative boundaries that correspond best to this urban centre. In this way, we
ensure we do not compare central Paris with all of London or Berlin. Countries with relatively small
local units, such as France and Switzerland, are more prone to this problem of under bounding.
So in short, a greater city is a city. The addition of the term greater functions only as a warning to the
data users that this EU-OECD definition of the city contains more local units than the central local unit
which gives this city its name (see Section 4 for a discussion on how local units are selected). The term
‘Greater City’ was previously used by Eurostat with a separate code to identify cities that had two
geographical levels: city and greater city. This has been discontinued as it was difficult to communicate
and create a risk that city residents would be double counted.

3.4. Defining a commuting zone

Checking for connected cities: the polycentricity check

The definition of the commuting zone starts with the ‘polycentricity check’, in other words check if two
or more cities are linked by strong commuting flows. If city A has 15% of its employed residents
commuting to city B, then these two cities will share a single commuting zone. It is sufficient that 15%
is reached in one direction. For example, if city B has a commuting flow of less 15% to city A, it will still
share the same commuting zone.
The polycentricity check is applied only once. It is not an iterative rule. For example: City C has a
commuting flow of 20% to city D. City F has a commuting flow of 10% to city C and 10% to city D. Then
                                                                                                              13
cities C and D will have a shared commuting zone, but city F will have its own commuting zone because
the flow to each individual city is too small.
If city H and city I both have a commuting flow over 15% to city J, then all three will share a single
commuting zone.

Creating the commuting zone

The next step is identifying all local units with at least 15% of their employed residents working in a
single city (or both cities in the case of cities linked by commuting flows).
If a local unit has a commuting flow of more than 15% to two different cities, it will become part of the
commuting zone of the city to which the flow is biggest. So if a local unit has a commuting flow of 20%
to city K and 17% to city L, it will be part of the commuting zone of city K.
Enclaves, i.e. local units surrounded by a single functional area, are included and exclaves or non-
contiguous local units are dropped. An enclave is defined as a local unit that shares 100% of its land
border with the functional area (city or commuting zone). Water borders are not considered.
Destination of the commuting flows should be the best approximation of the urban centre, i.e. all the
units with at least 50% of their population in the urban centre. If the city boundary is adjusted by adding
or dropping a few small local units or shifted to a higher administrative level (see next section), this
adjusted city should not be used for the commuting analysis. The only exception is where a single
urban centre is covered by multiple cities.


4. What local units to use?

The population grid helps to address the modifiable areal unit problem. Yet when these grid concepts
are used to classify local units, the problem that different shape and sizes of local units will lead to
different results reappears.
Many countries have more than one local administrative levels and more than one potential statistical
unit that might be chosen as ‘local units’ to delineate cities and FUAs. Smaller units will ensure a close
match between an urban centre and a city. Statistical offices, however, may not be able to provide
annual data for many indicators at this level. Smaller units, such as wards or districts, may not have as
strong a political role as municipalities do.
This section describes some of the issues encountered when using different sizes of local units and
proposes, where feasible, options of how to address them.

4.1. Large units may lead to the over-, under- or non-representation of an urban
centre by a city

The population of the urban centre and that of the city can differ quite a bit if a country has large local
units. Here we describe three types of issues that arise when using large local units to define a city.
                                                                                                                   14
    4.1.1. Overrepresentation

A city can have almost double the population of an urban centre. For example, an urban centre of
50,001 inhabitants in a local unit of 100,000 would mean that this local unit will be defined as a city.
This is a tricky problem to solve as the only alternative to the overrepresentation is non-representation,
i.e. by not defining this local unit as a city.

    4.1.1. Underrepresentation

A city can also have a much smaller population than the urban centre it represents. Take for example,
an urban centre of 200,000 inhabitants that is split across four local units. One local unit has a
population of 50,000 and all of them live in the urban centre. The other three local units each have a
population of 150,000 of which respectively 60,000, 50,000 and 40,000 live in that urban centre. As a
result, the city will consist just of that one local unit with a population of 50,000 and not the other three
other local units.
This underrepresentation can be reduced by adding the local unit with the highest share of its population
in that urban centre to the city (local unit B with 60,000 of its 150,000 inhabitants in the urban centre).
This would bring the population of the city up to 200,000 and 110,000 would live in the urban centre.
(See rule 1 in section 4.2).

    4.1.2. Non-representation

The most extreme form of under-representation is non-representation. For example, a local unit with a
population of 200,000 with a single urban centre of 75,000 inhabitants will not be classified as city. As
a result, this urban centre will not be represented by a city, i.e. non-representation, something which is
more likely to happen to small urban centres.
In a country where all the local units are large, all the small urban centres will not have a city
representing it. This would create a quite skewed representation of urban centres as all the small ones
would be missing.
One option to address this problem is that for half of the small urban centres without a city, their local
unit is classified as a city even though their share of population in an urban centre is less than 50%.

4.2. Small units may lead to a loss of the link to the city government or to less
statistical data

In a country with large local units, most cities will consist of a single unit. As a result, each city will have
a single local government. This makes it easier to communicate the indicators to local politicians and
ensures good input to polity making.
In countries with small local units, most cities will consist of multiple units. These small local units will
ensure that there is a close match between the population in the urban centre and the population in the
city. The price to pay is that the city will not match a single local government, which makes it more
complicated to communicate this data to local politicians.
This effect can be shown in Portugal, which has both municipalities (municipio or concelho) and
parishes (freguesia). If the urban centre of Braga in Figure 10 is used to define the municipal level (left
panel), there is a simple one-to-one relationship. The local government of Braga is organised at the
                                                                                                              15
municipal level. If the urban centre is used to define a city at the parish level (Figure 10, right panel),
the relationship becomes a more complicated one-to-many relationship. The simple link with local
government of Braga is also lost.
When statistical units are used as building blocks to define a city and/or a FUA, the latter can be
adapted ex post to the closest administrative local units. For example, cities and their commuting zones
in the United States have been delineated using census tracts as building block units, but subsequently
adapted to the closest county boundaries, by including the counties where the share of population living
in cities and FUAs was higher than 50%.
The imperfect match between the cities (and FUAs) and their respective urban centres can be
informative to policy makers. Administrative boundaries of cities often remain unchanged for decades,
while cities expand or shrink. Many OECD countries, following the process of urbanisation and urban
expansion occurred in the last few decades, have created new levels of government for large cities
encompassing multiple local units. For example, France has created metropoles to help govern their
21 biggest cities.


Figure 10. Braga, Portugal, as defined at parish level and at municipal level




4.3. Adjusting the city to ensure a better representation of the urban centre or a better
link to local government

If a country wishes to adjust its cities to get a better link between a city and its urban centre or a city
and its local government, it can add or drop a local unit as long as the two following rules are respected:
    1) Rule 1: A local unit with less than 50% of its population in an urban centre can be added to a
       city if at least 50% of the population of this expanded city lives in an urban centre.
    2) Rule 2: A local unit with 50% of its population in an urban centre can be excluded from a city
       as long as 75% of that urban centre population lives in a city after excluding that local unit.
                                                                                                               16
These two rules were designed to provide statistical limits to these optional changes that can be made:
A city should have 50% of its population in an urban centre and an urban centre should have 75% of
its population in a city.

    4.3.1. City adds a few local units

If Braga was defined at the parish level it would only contain some of the parishes in the municipality
of Braga. Defining Braga at municipal level amounts to adding the surrounding parishes to the city. As
still more than 50% of the population of the municipality of Braga lives in the urban centre, this complies
with rule 1. This also ensures a direct link to the Braga local government.

    4.3.1. City drops a few local units

An example of the application of rule 2 is Vienna. A number of small local units just south of the city of
Vienna have 50% or more of their population in the urban centre of Vienna. As more than 75% of the
population of the urban centre live in the city of Vienna, these smaller units can be dropped without
significantly compromising the comparability of the result (see Figure 11).


Figure 11 Dropping a few local units from a city. The case of Vienna, Austria




4.4. Cities without an urban centre

The methodology developed provides an estimate of the population of an urban centre. Two elements
may reduce the accuracy of this estimate: 1) geographic features and 2) the source of the population
grid data.
The methodology does not take into account the specific geography of a city. Some geographic
features, such as steep slopes, cliffs or bodies of water may lead to an underestimation of the
population of the urban centre. This affects in particular cities with a small centre.
This method works best when a bottom up grid (based on point data) or a high resolution, hybrid grid
(based on a mixture of points and smaller statistical units), is available, which ensure that the population
per square kilometre is very accurate. In the countries where such a grid is not yet available, local unit
population had to be disaggregated based on a given criterion, such as land use data in the case of
the GHS-POP grid produced by the Joint Research Centre. This is called a top-down method, which is
                                                                                                                17
less accurate. It tends to underestimate the population cells with a moderate to high density and
overestimate population in grid cells with a low population density. Due to this imprecision, there
remains a margin of error, especially for smaller centres.
Therefore, a statistical office may opt to classify a local unit as a city when it lacks an urban centre of
more than 50,000 inhabitants, but fulfils two conditions:
    1) The presence of an urban centre of 50,000 inhabitants, which the method does not capture
       due to geographic features or population grid estimation methods.
    2) The local unit has a population of more than 50,000 inhabitants
For example, a local unit which has two clusters of high density cells separated by a river of bay which
together have a population of 50,000 can be argued to have an undetected urban centre. A local unit
with a high density cluster of 49,000 inhabitants based on a top-down population grid can be argued to
have an undetected urban centre.


5. Terminology

This section summarises the terms used in the paper and that are necessary to distinguish the different
concepts used for the definition of ‘Functional Urban Area’ and ‘Degree of Urbanisation’ (Table 1). As
both the Functional Urban Area and the Degree of Urbanisation definitions were developed some time
ago, there are terms used in the past which are now discontinued. Table 1 clarifies the terminology
currently is use with respect to synonyms or discontinued terms.
Table 1. Terminology related to functional urban areas
     Preferred term                Synonym                      Discontinued terms        Geographic level
     Urban centre                  High-density cluster (HDC)                             Grid
     City                          Densely populated area       City core                 Local unit
                                                                Urban core
     Commuting zone                                             Hinterland                Local unit
     Functional urban area (FUA)                                Larger urban zone (LUZ)   Local unit
     Metropolitan area             FUA of at least 250 000                                Local unit
                                   inhabitants



In non-technical reports, it may be easier to use a shorter term than functional urban area. If a text uses
the term city to refer to the functional urban area, it should explain clearly that it is used in this sense.
The terms ‘urban core’ and ‘city core’ are discontinued, but the term ‘core’ can be still be used as a
synonym for either the city or the urban centre as long as this is clearly indicated that it is used as a
short term.
Previously, Eurostat had a greater city level with the code K instead of C to identify a greater city that
had one or more smaller cities within it. For example, Dublin had both a city and a greater city level.
This was confusing to the users and created the risk of double counting of some city residents. For this
reason, only one city level is now reported which is the former greater city level, if there was one, or
the city level.
                                                                                                            18
References

Dijkstra, L. and Poelman, H. (2012). Cities in Europe: the new OECD-EC definition. Regional Focus,
     1/2012. European Commission
     https://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/sources/docgener/focus/2012_01_city.pdf

Eurostat (2018), Methodological manual on territorial typologies. 2018 edition. Publication Office of the
    European Union, Luxembourg. https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/documents/3859598/9507230/KS-
    GQ-18-008-EN-N.pdf

Openshaw, S. (1977), “Optimal zoning systems for spatial interaction models”, Environment and
   Planning, Vol. A9, pp. 169 – 184.

OECD (2012), Redefining “Urban”: A New Way to Measure Metropolitan Areas, OECD Publishing.
   http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264174108-en




Annex I. Overview of the FUAs per country

The Annex I is available on-line at the web-link below, which is regularly updated.
https://www.oecd.org/cfe/regional-policy/All%20OECD%20countries%20-
%20Functionnal%20urban%20areas.pdf
