[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: book/C01-mcgee-1991-the-emergence-of-desakota-regions-in-asia-10.1515-9783868598933-010.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Producer:        iTextSharp 5.1.3 (c) 1T3XT BVBA
CreationDate:    Wed Mar 10 14:12:18 2021 WIB
ModDate:         Wed Mar 10 14:12:18 2021 WIB
Custom Metadata: no
Metadata Stream: no
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            none
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           17
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       467.717 x 680.315 pts
Page rot:        0
File size:       434283 bytes
Optimized:       no
PDF version:     1.6
[Extracted Text]
9
The Emergence of
Desakota Regions
in Asia: Expanding a
Hypothesis
Terry G. McGee




         The symbiosis of urban and rural in Megalopolis, creating new and interesting
         patterns of multiple-purpose land use over large areas, gives to the region a rather
         unique character. Like the downtown business districts with powerful skylines,
         this aspect of Megalopolis will probably be repeated in slightly different but not
         too dissimilar versions in many other regions of the rapidly-urbanizing world.
                                                                           –Jean Gottmann1


         Paddy has developed a strikingly similar landscape, broadly similar from the
         Ganga to the Yangtze … but no other way of life … has led to the evolution of
         a cultural system so stable and permanent as that associated with the great paddy-
         plains of Monsoon Asia.
                                                –O. H. K. Spate and A. I. A. Learmonth2


This chapter is a preliminary exploration of the emergence or what appear to be new
regions of extended urban activity surrounding the core cities of many Asian countries.3
The ideas to be explored must be placed in the framework of the overall patterns of
urbanization at a global and regionalized level, which are predicting a continuing increase
in the proportion of the world’s urban population. By the year 2020, the UN Centre
for Human Settlements predicts that more than 57 percent of the world’s population
will be living in urban places.4 This population will be unevenly urbanized, with levels of
urbanization at almost 77 percent in developed countries and 53 percent in developing
countries. Within the developing countries, the contrast will be even greater, with Latin
America 83 percent urbanized, and Africa and Asia close to 50 percent. However, Asia’s
urban population will account for a very large portion of that of the developing countries.
Bangladesh, India, China, Indonesia, and Pakistan together will contain 34 percent of the
developing countries’ urban population.


These United Nations predictions are largely based on assumptions concerning the growth
of population in places defined as urban. The predictions are calculated using growth
rates reflecting performance in previous decades. When projected forward, they appear to
suggest a successful shift to urbanized societies and a repetition of patterns of the more
developed countries. As Ginsburg has commented about urbanization in the United States,
“This condition reflects the progression of the … space-economy to a state of what one
might consider ‘maturity,’ that is, to a condition whereby areas possessed of substantial
comparative advantage … would be drawn effectively, through improved transportation
networks, into the national geographic structure.”5 The implication for the urban systems
of the largest developing countries is that a continued growth will create immense cities
of about 16 million to 30 million. However, this may not be the only possible outcome for
Asian urbanization.


The purpose of this chapter is to draw upon earlier ideas put forward by McGee and
Ginsburg to challenge this particular view of the urban transition.6 The Ginsburg-McGee
position essentially argued that in the Asian context, the conventional view of the urban
transition—which assumes that the widely accepted distinction between rural and urban
will persist as the urbanization process advances—needs to be reevaluated. Distinctive areas
of agricultural and non-agricultural activity are emerging adjacent to and between urban
cores, which are a direct response to preexisting conditions, time-space collapse, economic
change, technological developments, and labor force change occurring in a different manner
and mix from the operation of these factors in the Western industrialized countries in the
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.


To elaborate further, the conventional view of the urban transition is inadequate in three
respects. First, it is too narrow in its view that the widely accepted spatial separation of
rural and urban activities will persist as urbanization continues.


Second, it is inadequate in its assumption that the urbanization transition will be
inevitable because of the operation of “agglomeration economies” and comparative
advantage, which are said to facilitate the concentration of the population in linked urban
places. The emergence of such a system was described by Jean Gottmann in 1961 as a
“megalopolis” in which, when applied to the northeastern United States, the population
was largely concentrated in the urban and suburban areas, but interspersed with areas of
low population density used for agriculture and as leisure spaces by the population of the
       123                                             megapolitan areas.7 ln many parts of Asia, the spatial juxtaposition of many of the larger
                                                       city cores within heavily populated regions of intensive, mostly wet-rice agriculture based




C omplete Urbanization— E xperience , Site, P rocess
                                                       on a mixture of “skill-oriented” and “mechanical’’ technological inputs has created densities
                                                       of population that are frequently much higher than in the suburban areas of the West.8 This
                                                       juxtaposition permits demographic densities similar to urban areas over extended zones of
                                                       intensely cultivated rural areas located adjacent to urban cores. The considerable advances
                                                       in transportation technology, particularly in relatively cheap intermediate transportation
                                                       technology, such as two-stroke motorbikes, greatly facilitate the circulation of commodities,
                                                       people, and capital in such regions, creating, in turn, large mega-urban regions.

                                                       Third, the Western paradigm of the urban transition, which draws its rationale from the
                                                       historical experience of urbanization as it has occurred in Western Europe and North
                                                       America in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, is clearly not neatly transferable to
                                                       the developing countries’ urbanization process. The uneven incorporation of these Asian
                                                       countries into a world economic system from the fifteenth century onward created divergent
                                                       patterns of urbanization, which reflect the different interactions between Asian countries
                                                       and the world system.9 For example, the British, French and Dutch all developed the
                                                       productivity of wet-rice agriculture in Southeast Asia.10 In a similar manner, Japanese rule in
                                                       Korea and Taiwan further accentuated the monocrop rice characteristics of parts of these
                                                       countries as sources of supply for Japan’s prewar empire. Geopolitical events determined
                                                       that both these countries emerged into “fragile” independence with high rural densities
                                                       and low levels of urbanization. On the contrary, British intervention in Malaysia created an
                                                       urban system oriented to the production of export products on the west coast away from
                                                       the heavily populated rice bowls of Kedah and Kelantan, limiting the possibilities of an
                                                       emergent mega-urban region.


                                                       Because of these inadequacies in the conventional view, the concept of the “urban
                                                       transition” needs to be positioned within a broader paradigm of the transition in the
                                                       space-economy of countries. Such a paradigm would include (1) a heightened sensitivity
                                                       to the historical elements of the urban and agrarian transition within specific countries; (2)
                                                       an appreciation of the ecological, demographic and economic foundations of the urban
                                                       and agrarian transition; (3) an investigation of the institutional components, particularly the
                                                       role of the state in the development process; (4) a careful evaluation of the transactional
                                                       components within given countries including transport, commodity, and population flows;
                                                       and (5) a broad understanding of the structural shifts in the labor force reflecting economic
                                                       change. Essentially, such an approach is an attempt to investigate the manner in which
                                                       particular sets of conditions in one place interact with broader processual change. It is
                                                       not so much concerned with the contrast between rural and urban as the space-economy
                                                       changes but focuses instead on the interactions within the space economy as they affect the
                                                       emergence of particular regions of economic activity. This view has important implications
                                                       for policy making in the Asian context, for it poses a challenge to sectoral approaches to
                                                       development planning.
Definitions and Parameters


Since this assertion is quite challenging to those who have vested interests in the persistence
of the urban-rural paradigm, it is necessary to spell out in some detail the definitional
components of this broader view of the “space-economy transition.”


Figure 9.1 presents a model of the spatial configuration of a hypothetical Asian country,
which I will label Asiatica Euphoria for the purposes of this exercise.11


In this example, five main regions of the spatial economy are identified as follows:


1.   The major cities of the urban hierarchy, which are often dominated in the Asian
     context by one or two extremely large cities.


2.   The peri-urban regions, which are those areas surrounding the cities within a daily
     commuting reach of the city core. In some parts of Asia, these regions can stretch for
     up to thirty kilometers away from the city core.


3.   The regions labeled desakota, which are regions of an intense mixture of agricultural
     and non-agricultural activities that often stretch along corridors between large city
     cores.12 These regions were previously characterized by dense populations engaged in
     agriculture, generally but not exclusively dominated by wet-rice.


4.   Densely populated rural regions, which occur in many Asian countries, particularly
     those practicing wet-rice agriculture.




9.1 Spatial configuration of a hypothetical Asian country
       125                                             5.   Finally, the sparsely populated frontier regions found in many Asian countries that
                                                            offer opportunities for land colonization schemes and various forms of agricultural




C omplete Urbanization— E xperience , Site, P rocess
                                                            development.


                                                       The model of the spatial economy is, of course, static and must change as the economy
                                                       changes. The pace and characteristics of this settlement transition vary from country to
                                                       country, reflecting the features of socioeconomic change at the macro level. The role that
                                                       the growth of metropolitan cores and the desakota process play in this transformation is
                                                       of major importance. The mega-urban regions that emerge often incorporate two large
                                                       urban cores linked by effective transportation routes. These regions include the major cities,
                                                       peri-urban zones, and an extensive zone of mixed rural-urban land use along such routes.
                                                       Travel time between any two points in a region would probably be no more than three to
                                                       four hours, but in most cases is considerably less. Mixed economic activities may also occur
                                                       in villages in these zones, which are less accessible and where economic linkages are more
                                                       reliant on social networks.


                                                       It should be stressed that this model of the transition of the space-economy is not intended
                                                       to be universally applicable, but to fit the situation where one or more urban cores are
                                                       located in densely settled peasant rural areas.13 There may also be cases where the urban
                                                       cores are located in lightly populated regions of plantation agriculture as in the case of
                                                       Kuala Lumpur in Malaysia. The contrast between the two agroeconomic systems as they
                                                       are reflected in socioeconomic systems, export trade, and class relations is not a new theme.
                                                       It has been used by Baldwin for a theoretical exposition of patterns of development in
                                                       newly settled regions, by Dowd to explain the differences in the settlement patterns of
                                                       the American west and south, and by Morse to explain the different urban systems that
                                                       evolved in the “hacienda” and “plantation” regions of Latin America.14 These writers are
                                                       not suggesting that a particular urban system results from a preexisting agroeconomic
                                                       system, but rather that the existence of these agroeconomic systems provides the possibility
                                                       for the emergence of certain urban systems and regions.


                                                       ln the Asian context, the existence of high-density agricultural regions adjacent to large
                                                       urban cores offers an opportunity for a particular form of mega-urban region to emerge.
                                                       Their existence does not ensure the inevitability of the emergence of such regions. These
                                                       will result from, for example, the policies of private and public sectors, the form of
                                                       economic growth, and the position of the urban core relative to international connections.
                                                       In the case of the Republic of Korea, with a precondition of high-density rice regions, the
                                                       government adopted a strategy of concentrating on industrialization rather than agriculture,
                                                       which led to slow growth in rural income and a release of surplus rural population into
                                                       urban-based industrialization. Thus, South Korea was characterized by a metropolis-
                                                       dominated urban hierarchy. By contrast, in a region of similar pre-existing rural densities
                                                       such as Jogjakarta in Java, in a slow-growth situation there are only limited possibilities for
                                                       drawing off surplus rural population to urban centers in other parts of the country, and the
rural inhabitants engage in an intense mixture of non-agricultural and agricultural activity
that permits survival but does not increase income.


There are at least three types of spatial economy transition occurring in Asia in regions
that have the prerequisite of the historical evolution of high-density, mostly rice-growing
agroeconomic niches.


First, there are those countries that have seen a decline in rural settlement, land use and
agricultural population as the population has moved to urban centers. In such countries,
agricultural land use may remain important as a reflection of government land or agricultural
protection policies. This pattern has been associated with overall increases in income and
productivity in which rural populations fall well behind those of urban areas. South Korea
and Japan are examples of such a spatial economy transition. These countries will be labeled
desakota Type I or konjuka, the Japanese term for landscapes that have a mixture of small
farm plots, residences and industry. Such regions are characterized by rural landscapes in
which most of the economically active work is in non-agricultural activities.15


Second, there are those regions in which, over varying periods of time, productivity gains in
agriculture and industry, and secular shifts from agricultural to non-agricultural activities are
focused particularly on the urban cores and adjacent regions. These changes are linked to
rising household income, improved transportation linkages, and improved infrastructures.
Examples occur in regions such as Nanjing-Shanghai-Hangzhou, the Central Plains of
Thailand, the Taipei-Kaohsiung corridor, the Calcutta region and Jabotabek in Java. These
may be identified as desakota Type 2, and are characterized by rapid economic growth
compared to other regions of the country.


Third, there are those regions of high density in which economic growth is slow. Often such
regions are located close to secondary urban centers that have slow economic growth, and
are characterized by continuing high population growth, surplus labor and persistent low
productivity in both agriculture and non-agriculture. Examples are the Jogjakarta region
in Java, Kerala in South India, Bangladesh and the Sichuan Basin in the interior of China.
These regions will be labeled desakota Type 3, and are characterized by slow growth of
income and involuntary economic activity.16


The Emergence of the Extended Metropolitan Region in Asia


Figure 9.2 shows the location of the core regions in Asia as grouped into the three main
desakota types. First are those countries that have experienced a rapid transformation of the
spatial economy in terms of rural-to-urban shift in population, although agricultural land
use may remain quite persistent. Japan and South Korea are the most prominent examples.17
       127                                             Second, there are those regions of countries that have experienced a rapid change in their
                                                       economic features in the past 30 years. An example is the Taipei-Kaohsiung corridor of




C omplete Urbanization— E xperience , Site, P rocess
                                                       Taiwan, which has experienced a declining proportion of agricultural employment from 56
                                                       to 20 percent between 1956 and 1980, and a concurrent growth of industrialization. Speare
                                                       and his colleagues have estimated that the growth of small to medium-sized industries
                                                       in rural areas slowed the growth rate of cities by 6 percent in the 1960s and 1970s.18 At
                                                       the same time, this region was characterized by a decline of staple crops as a proportion
                                                       of the total agricultural value of production. Thus, over the past 30 years, although the
                                                       production of rice has increased considerably, the share of rice as a proportion of gross
                                                       agricultural receipts has dropped from 50 percent in 1950 to 34 percent in 1980. At the
                                                       same time, other agricultural products have increased from 20 to 36 percent, and vegetables
                                                       and fruit from 7 to 20 percent. More recently, there has been a rapid increase in fish farming
                                                       (prawns), chicken rearing and other forms of capital-intensive agribusiness. This shift has
                                                       led to a significant change in the pattern of female employment, with a decline from 52.5
                                                       percent (1965) in primary industry to 16 percent in 1980, and an increase in secondary
                                                       industry from 18.2 to 43.7 percent.19 Similar patterns are being exhibited in the Bangkok-
                                                       Central Plains region of Thailand and the four major coastal zones of China. These regions,




                                                       9.2 Growth of core areas in Asia
with only 12.5 percent of China’s population, accounted for 46.4 percent of the value of
industrial production and 13 percent of the value of agricultural output in 1986.


Third, there is a type of region that bears some spatial and economic resemblance to
Type 2 but is characterized by changes that occur because of high population growth and
slower economic growth. This situation results in the persistence of underemployment
and self-employment in unpaid family work and enterprises. In such regions there may be
a juxtaposition of elements of Type 1 and Type 2, producing a highly dualistic economic
structure. Thus, technological inputs in agriculture may cause labor shedding and an increase
in non-agricultural activities in the rural areas adjacent to urban cores. This phenomenon
has been recorded in areas such as Kerala and Tamil Nadu. Although there is often some
growth of small industry and other income opportunities, these regions are characterized by
the persistence of low incomes, which reflect the slow structural transition in the allocation
of labor. In some cases, regions continue to absorb population into agricultural areas (for
instance, the Sichuan Basin) where non-agricultural employment has remained fairly static
over the past forty years while the population has almost doubled in size.20


Conditions and Processes Underlying the Emergence of New Zones
of Economic Interaction: Desakota


Given the diversity of these transitions, it may well be argued that the desakota have little
in common with one another. However, certain common conditions and processes occur
in these regions.


First, virtually all these regions are characterized by densely populated, small-holder
cultivation agriculture, commonly wet-rice, which involves careful water management and
agronomic practices.21 Densities frequently approach 1,000 people per square kilometer of
cultivated land. Historically, Oshima has argued, the pronounced seasonality and the intense
labor of planting and harvesting have had two results: increasing population density, which
has led to increasingly smaller farm plots, and uneven seasonal demands for labor inputs.
During the off-season, “This dense population must look for off-farm employment since
most farms are too small to generate enough income to live on … Monsoon rice-farming
never became separated from nonagriculture as it was in the West where cropping came
to be combined with animal husbandry in large capitalistic farms.”22 He goes on to argue
that in the prewar centuries “monsoon agriculture kept large masses of workers tied down
in rural areas, rendering the large labor supply inflexible.”23 ln a pre-Green Revolution
situation, the capacity of the population of rice-growing areas to increase and still produce
enough rice to avoid famine even with very limited infrastructural investment is the basic
explanation that Geertz provides for the growth of Java’s population from 5 million to 25
million in 10 decades of slow economic growth.24 This argument can be applied to many of
the other Asian rice bowls in India, China, Japan, Korea and Southeast Asia. Bray reinforces
this point with the following comment:
       129                                                       The organization of resources typical of a “skill-orientated” technology such as
                                                                 intensive rice farming dovetails very neatly with petty commodity production,




C omplete Urbanization— E xperience , Site, P rocess
                                                                 which requires very little capital to set up a family enterprise and absorbs surplus
                                                                 labour without depriving the farm of workers at times of peak demand. It can
                                                                 be expanded, diversified or contracted according to market demands, but the
                                                                 combination with the rice farm guarantees the family subsistence. The products
                                                                 can be conveniently conveyed to national markets by merchants, who pay the
                                                                 villagers for their labour and often provide raw materials as well as information
                                                                 on the state of the market.25

                                                       Thus, it is possible to argue that the labor force of these rice-bowl areas was “culturally”
                                                       prepared to commit its labor to various forms of “new” non-agricultural activity.


                                                       Second, in virtually all the rice-bowl areas there were large cities or clusters of cities such as
                                                       Calcutta, Shanghai, Bangkok and Guangzhou that provided both opportunities for seasonal
                                                       labor and important markets for rural rice and other products. The linkages with these cities
                                                       were important for the surrounding rural areas for cultural and economic reasons.


                                                       Third, these regions were frequently characterized by a well-developed infrastructure of
                                                       roads and canals that allowed an intense movement of commodities and people. Indeed,
                                                       one is constantly reminded of the importance of water systems for these regions as the
                                                       fundamental sustainers of the ecological system. Colonial impact, whether by Britain, Japan
                                                       or Holland, did little to change these patterns. Indeed, by the provision of political stability
                                                       and investment in infrastructure the colonial powers frequently enhanced the preconditions
                                                       for growing populations.


                                                       Fourth, by the early 1950s, all of these regions were large, cheap labor reservoirs waiting
                                                       to be tapped by state, international and private capital investment. The manner in which
                                                       this labor was incorporated into non-agricultural activity varied markedly from country
                                                       to country and region to region. Most successful were Japan, Taiwan and South Korea,
                                                       where both industrialization and agricultural growth led the way in Asia. In these three
                                                       countries, efforts were made to increase rural income through higher yield, guaranteed
                                                       prices, diversification into non-rice crops, and increased opportunities for employment
                                                       in rural industries. This effort was aided by physical infrastructure improvements such as
                                                       rural roads, electrification, consolidation and irrigation. Increased mechanization released
                                                       labor, particularly women, to work in industry. Institutional changes, particularly land
                                                       reform and the introduction of higher yielding rice varieties, were crucial in this process.
                                                       In addition, the state invested in major transportation linkages such as freeways and
                                                       electrified railways, which pulled these regions closer to the urban cores. Of course, these
                                                       processes did not prevent the movement of labor out of agriculture into non-agriculture
                                                       and urban centers, which accelerated in Japan in the 1960s, in Korea in the 1970s, and
                                                       in Taiwan in the 1980s. But political and institutional imperatives, particularly the need
for food self-sufficiency, encouraged the persistence of rice farming and created konjuka
landscapes.


ln other countries, these processes moved more slowly, partly because the institutional
changes of the “Three Tigers” could not be implemented. The Philippines is an excellent
example of initial success and then slowdown because of bad government. In the late
1970s, however, other regions in Asia began to exhibit enough of the features responsible
for the successes in Japan, Korea and Taiwan to achieve considerable growth. For example,
the four regions of Hong Kong, Guangzhou-Macao, Nanjing-Shanghai-Hangzhou, Beijing-
Tianjin-Tangshan and Shenyang-Dalian have exhibited all these features since 1978. Wang
and Veeck have shown how remarkably these regions fit the model of desakota.26 Other
studies find the same processes occurring in the Central Plains of Thailand and even in
the extended Calcutta Metropolitan Region, which has long had the reputation of being
one of the main centers of world poverty.27 Rice-bowl areas such as Kerala, Bangladesh,
Jogjakarta and the Sichuan Basin, less favorably positioned from the viewpoint of state
and private investment, exhibit a persistence of low income and continuing pressure of
population on available resources.


Fifth, all the desakota regions were characterized by highly integrated “transactive”
environments in terms of movement of people and commodities, for example. In many
cases, the dense network of rural canals and waterways was central to this integration
prior to the Second World War. The onset of technological developments in intermediate
transportation since the 1950s has greatly accelerated this process.


Finally, it is important to acknowledge the role of the expansion of the global economy and
the international division of labor, which create a situation where national governments
responsible for gigantic, cheap labor pools have adopted different policies with respect to
permitting or encouraging their countries’ labor to be tapped for national and international
industrial growth. In this respect, the location of desakota Type 1 and 2 regions adjacent to
large cities and transportation points has been particularly important. From the viewpoint
of many investors, investment in industry in these regions is cheaper for virtually all the
factors of production, and they are able to avoid some of the diseconomies that exist in the
large urban zones. Thus, these regions are important areas of subcontracting for a portion
of the industrial production process.


To summarize, the regions designated as desakota have six main features.


1.   They have been or are characterized by a large population engaged in small-holder
     cultivation of rice, which before the Second World War conducted considerable
     interaction through accessible transportation routes.
       131                                             2.   They are generally characterized by an increase in non-agricultural activities in areas
                                                            that have previously been largely agricultural. These non-agricultural activities are




C omplete Urbanization— E xperience , Site, P rocess
                                                            very diverse, and include trading, transportation and industry. The increase in non-
                                                            agricultural activity is characterized by a mixture of activities, often by members of
                                                            the same household. Thus, one person may commute to the city to work as a clerk,
                                                            another engage in farming, a third work in industry, and another find employment in
                                                            retailing in the desakota zone. This mixture creates a situation in which the economic
                                                            linkages within such a region may be as important as the dominance of the large cities
                                                            in the megalopolis that draw the surrounding regions into their orbit.


                                                       3.   The desakota zones are generally characterized by extreme fluidity and mobility of
                                                            the population. The availability of relatively cheap transport such as two-stroke
                                                            motorbikes, buses and trucks has facilitated relatively quick movement over longer
                                                            distances than could be covered previously. Thus, these zones are characterized not
                                                            only by commuting to the larger urban centers but also by intense movement of people
                                                            and goods within the zone.


                                                       4.   The desakota zones are characterized by an intense mixture of land use with agriculture,
                                                            cottage industry, industrial estates, suburban developments and other uses existing
                                                            side by side. Such a mix has both negative and positive effects. Agricultural products,
                                                            particularly industrial crops, have a ready market, but the waste of industrial activity
                                                            can pollute and destroy agricultural land. On the whole, these zones are much more
                                                            intensely utilized than the American megalopolis, with regard to which Gottmann
                                                            commented on the amount of woodland and recreational areas that exist. In the
                                                            desakota zones of Asian countries, population pressures place greater demands on the
                                                            available space.


                                                       5.   Another feature of the desakota zones is the increased participation of women in
                                                            nonagricultural labor. In part, this feature is associated with a demand for female
                                                            labor in industry, domestic service and other activities, but it is also closely related
                                                            to changing patterns of agricultural production in the desakota regions. Generally,
                                                            agricultural production shows a shift from monocrop grain cultivation to increased
                                                            diversity with production of livestock, vegetables and fruit, sometimes for national
                                                            and interregional consumption.


                                                       6.   Finally, desakota zones are to some extent “invisible” or “gray” zones from the
                                                            viewpoint of the state authorities. Urban regulations may not apply in these “rural
                                                            areas,” and it is difficult for the state to enforce them despite the rapidly changing
                                                            economic structure of the regions. This feature is particularly encouraging to the
                                                            “informal sector” and small-scale operators who find it difficult to conform to labor
                                                            or industrial legislation.
In essence, then, the central processers that shape these regions are the dynamic linkages
between agriculture and non-agriculture, and investment seeking to utilize cheap labor
and land within a distinctive agroecological setting. Ranis and Stewart have identified how
expansion in agricultural output leads to an expansion in other activities and, conversely,
how additional non-agricultural activity in the rural areas provides opportunities and
incentives for raising agricultural productivity.28


In the desakota regions that show the greatest increase of both agricultural and
nonagricultural income, there is a general rise in household income. Depending on the
expenditure decisions of households (savings/expenditure ratios), there may be an increase
in demand for local supplies, goods from urban centers and imports. Ranis and Stewart
show significant variations in different regions. Thus, in Taiwan an increase in agricultural
income in rural areas was associated with increased nonagricultural production-related
employment and high increases in all linkages. In the Philippines, slower rates of agricultural
production associated with a large population increase led to an increase in low-income
non-agricultural employment and limited linkages with larger markets. The Philippine
situation is typical of the “involuntary” and “distress” features of surplus labor markets
first discussed by W. Arthur Lewis.29


Questions Concerning the Desakota Regions in Asia


The regions where the desakota processes are in full operation are clearly an important
part of the “settlement transition” in Asia. For example, Zhou reported that the four
key economic regions of China (Nanjing-Shanghai-Hangzhou, Hong Kong-Guangzhou-
Macao, Beijing-Tianjin-Tangshan and Shenyang-Dalian) with approximately 12 percent of
the nation’s population in 1986-87 were responsible for 47 percent of its industrial output.
These four key economic regions play a crucial role in the current phase of rapid economic
growth in China. Similar arguments were presented by Liu and Tsai for Taiwan. Thus, there
is a great deal of support for the assertion that these regions are highly significant foci
for the development process. However, further data are needed to support the assertion,
particularly with respect to the following questions:


ln what manner are these new economic regions different from the “zones of urban
influence” that are well established in the urban transition literature? In other words, if these
zones are simply a greater areal extension of the “peri-urban” region of large cities that
have been brought about by space-time collapse and transportation improvements, then
what is different about them from the so-called peri-urban regions? In fact, the relationship
between the urban cores and the adjacent regions is important to the sustainability of these
regions, and therefore any study of these regions must investigate the urban core functions
and the relationships with the surrounding regions.
       133                                             Can economic data be collected to show processes operating that facilitate certain types of
                                                       economic activities in these regions? For instance, are there diseconomies associated with




C omplete Urbanization— E xperience , Site, P rocess
                                                       large cities that facilitate the location of economic activities in such zones? Is the legislative
                                                       environment in such zones more permissive (are taxes lower?) for certain types of activities?
                                                       Are wage rates persistently lower? Are the social overhead costs lower in such regions? In
                                                       other words, are there economic benefits that facilitate the growth of economic activities
                                                       in these regions that may be a “growth generator” in the development process?


                                                       Are such regions likely to exhibit short-term persistence (up to 50 years), or are they simply
                                                       a transitory phenomenon? Some evidence presented by Liu and Tsai suggests that in Taiwan
                                                       the persistence of such a region, at least in the corridor between Taipei and Kaohsiung, is
                                                       questionable. They show evidence that the population is concentrating in the northwest
                                                       quadrant of Taiwan as the industrial and services characteristics of the economy change.
                                                       This shift is associated with a decline in agricultural employment. Is there some point in
                                                       the development process at which the agglomerative tendencies will take over? This type
                                                       of question has important policy implications for countries such as China or India as their
                                                       economies develop.


                                                       Issues of Policy Formation


                                                       Prevailing policy prescription for macrointervention in the spatial shift of population during
                                                       development is broadly polarized between acceptance of big-city growth representing
                                                       the “rational” development of economies of scale and agglomeration, and arguments in
                                                       favor of the development of “small” and “intermediate” towns in the urban hierarchy,
                                                       decentralization of industry, and frontier development.30 Current developments raise the
                                                       question of whether desakota regions represent a viable “middle” policy option and, if so,
                                                       what kinds of policies need to be adopted. A range of “problems” result from the growth of
                                                       urban cores and the desakota regions adjacent to them, including environmental degradation,
                                                       waste removal and adequate delivery of social welfare. Before the issue of some form
                                                       of “middle planning option” is tackled, it will be necessary for the governments of the
                                                       region to deal with the fundamental issue of the usefulness of a rural-urban distinction.
                                                       In reviewing the debate on “urban bias,” Harriss and Moore explain this point as follows:


                                                                 There are two themes central and common to their [“urban bias” analysts] work.
                                                                 First, in attempting to explain national level patterns of economic resource
                                                                 allocation within a political economy framework, they use the concept of economic
                                                                 sectors, mainly the rural/agricultural versus urban/industrial categorization.
                                                                 Second, they suggest in varying degrees that the way in which sectoral conflicts
                                                                 influence the allocation of economic resources through state action has been the
                                                                 prime cause of slow rates of economic growth (and in Lipton’s work, of growth
                                                                 biased against the poor) in developing countries since the Second World War.31
But what happens if the rural-urban dichotomy ceases to exist, as in the case of desakota
zones? Then the whole policy debate on urban and rural allocation of resources becomes
fuzzy and meaningless, unless one accepts Lipton’s argument that “rural-urban is not a
categorization of space alone. To see it like that is to underpin an incorrect, absolute
distinction between geographical (residence, density), occupational, sectoral and class
categorizations of households.”32


All societies have working spatial definitions of urban and rural areas. These definitions are
highly variable from country to country and are often changed. However, most definitions
have some common elements such as size and political definition. For instance, in some
countries all gazetted towns exceeding a population of ten thousand are regarded as urban;
everything else is rural. In fact, it is more important to know two important economic
pieces of information:


1.   What is the contribution of agricultural and non-agricultural activities to the GDP of
     a given spatial unit (nation, province, and so on)?


2.   What is the proportion of the working labor force employed in agricultural and non-
     agricultural work in a given spatial unit?


If this information were available over given time periods, it would be possible to develop
a more precise definition of urban and rural areas.


One could conceive a rather simple matrix constructed at the level of small administrative
units that would allow a fourfold spatial division of a country on a continuum from the
most urban spatial unit to the most non-urban spatial unit (Figure 9.3).


Assuming some ideal statistical base, this type of analysis would enable the estimation of the
contribution of the urban spatial units to the GDP, as compared to the non-urban spatial
units. Temporal data, if available, would permit the assessment of the relative contribution
of urban and non-urban areas to the GDP through time as well as the differences in
the labor force over lime. This kind of information would provide vital feedback to the
government in assessing the spatial impact of its investment policies. Unfortunately,
few developing societies possess data that can be analyzed in this way, relying instead on
macrodata that conceal these significant differences between urban and non-urban areas.


There appear to be six priorities for many Asian countries if they are to develop pragmatic
strategies that attempt to recognize the importance of the desakota regions. First, the
government will have to make some significant decisions with respect to agricultural
policy. All indications are that in most Asian countries, the “agricultural issue” is of central
importance to desakota regions. The problem revolves around the need for a sufficient
supply of foodstuffs and the “cultural” demand for agricultural activity in Asian countries.
       135
                                                           1                                         3




C omplete Urbanization— E xperience , Site, P rocess
                                                           Spatial units with more than 50 percent   Spatial units with less than 50 percent
                                                           •     contribution by non-agricultural    •     contribution by non-agricultural
                                                                 economic activities to spatial            economic activities to spatial
                                                                 unit GDP                                  unit GDP                            most urban
                                                           •     of the labor force in non-          and more than 50 percent
                                                                 agricultural activities
                                                                                                     •     of the labor force in non-
                                                                                                           agricultural activities



                                                           2                                         4
                                                           Spatial units with more than 50 percent   Spatial units with less than 50 percent

                                                           •     contribution by non-agricultural    •     contribution by non-agricultural
                                                                 economic activities to spatial            economic activities to spatial
                                                                 unit GDP                                  unit GDP;                           least urban
                                                           and less than 50 percent                  •     of the labor force in non-
                                                                                                           agricultural activities.
                                                           •     of the labor force in non-
                                                                 agricultural activities



                                                       9.3 Spatial units and economic outputs


                                                       The crucial issue is how long rice growing, for example, will persist in desakota regions
                                                       as economic growth proceeds. In the cases of Japan, Korea and Taiwan, it appears that
                                                       policies will eventually reduce the role of rice in desakota areas. In other cases, labor is being
                                                       released from rice growing as a result of technological changes over which governments
                                                       apparently have little control.


                                                       Second, Asian governments will seriously need to consider in what manner the release of
                                                       labor from agricultural labor pools is going to occur. Policies that slow down geographical
                                                       relocation and foster in situ development should be given priority. Given the already
                                                       high levels of development in these regions, they should not be expensive. Of course,
                                                       the problems of the more “traditional” regions of desakota, such as Sichuan, are more
                                                       intractable and should be tackled by more conventional development inputs that emphasize
                                                       population control, delivery of basic needs and integrated rural development.


                                                       Third, Asian governments will have to recognize the reality of these zones of intense
                                                       urban-rural interaction and direct much of their investment to these areas. This means
                                                       making hard decisions against fostering small-town development and rural industrialization
                                                       in less accessible areas without neglecting rural-integrated development schemes in such
                                                       areas. Many governments should opt for policies of “modified regional growth pole”
                                                       growth (emphasizing not just the urban pole but also the large mega-urban region of
                                                       which it is part).
Fourth, Asian governments will need to monitor carefully the growth of economic activities
in these zones for the obvious problems that will arise over conflict in incompatible land
uses and environmental pollution, for example. This process will involve great care, for
one of the major factors favoring the economic vitality of the desakota zones is the mixture
of land uses.


Fifth, Asian governments will need to improve access in these zones of intense rural-
urban interaction with improved roads and fast railway communication. In this respect, the
building of the Shinkansen, the Seoul-Pusan Highway, and the Taipei-Kaohsiung Freeway
have been crucial to the development of Japan, Korea and Taiwan, respectively. This costly
investment reaps developmental rewards.


Finally, Asian governments should develop new spatial systems of data collection similar to
those of the “living perimeters” of Taiwan, which will enable them to monitor effectively
the impact of investment decisions on labor force composition and income, among others,
within the desakota zones.


Of course, the timing of government strategies and fiscal ability to implement them are
not easy to gauge. However, the demographic and economic reality of the growth of the
desakota means that planning decisions relating to them cannot be postponed.


Conclusion


The historical evolution of the desakota regions has created a unique opportunity for Asian
development. Whether this opportunity will be taken advantage of in all Asian countries
remains to be seen, but certainly the challenge to urban versus rural growth, which seems
so central to many Asian development strategies, can be resolved at least partially through
the planned development of desakota regions.


Notes
1   Jean Gottmann, Megalopolis: the Urbanized Northeastern Seaboard of the         (Honolulu: EWCEAPI, 1987). See also Norton Ginsburg, The
    United States (New York: Kraus, 1961) 257.                                     Urban Transition: Reflections on the American and Asian Experiences
2   O. H. K. Spate and A. I. A. Learmonth, India and Pakistan: A General           (Hong Kong: Chinese University Press, 1990).
    and Regional Geography (London: Methuen, 1967) 202.                        7   Jean Gottmann, Megalopolis: the Urbanized Northeastern Seaboard of
3   Some of the ideas in this chapter were first put forward in an                 the United States (New York: Twentieth Century Fund, 1961) 257.
    address to the International Conference on Asian Urbanization              8   This division between “skill-oriented” and “mechanical”
    held at the University of Akron in April 1985. See Terry G. McGee,             technological inputs is used to buttress Bray’s provocative
    “Urbanisasi or Kotadesasi? Evolving Patterns of Urbanization in                arguments concerning the distinctive role of Asian wet-rice
    Asia,” Urbanization in Asia: Spatial Deimensions and Policy Issues, eds.       agriculture in the agrarian development processes in Asia. She
    Frank J. Costa, Ashok K. Dutt, Laurence Ma and Allen G. Noble                  argues persuasively that this agroeconomic system has created very
    (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1989) 93-108.                           different conditions from the “Western model.” This position is
4   United Nations, Centre for Human Settlements, Global Report on                 certainly central to some of the arguments of this chapter, but its
    Human Settlements (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987).                     acceptance does not rule out the application of the “mechanical”
5   Norton Ginsburg, “Extended Metropolitan Regions in Asia: A New                 technological input (as reflected by capital replacing labor in these
    Spatial Paradigm,” The Urban Transition: Reflections on the American and       regions), as can be seen in the growth of agribusiness in the
    Asian Experiences (Hong Kong: Chinese University Press, 1990) 21.              chicken industry in areas such as the Central Plains of Thailand.
6   See Terry G. McGee, Urbanisasi or Kotadesasi? The Emergence of                 See Francesca Bray, The Rice Economies: Technology and Development in
    New Regions of Economic Interaction in Asia, Working Paper 87/8                Asian Societies (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1986).
137

9    This argument is presented in much greater detail for Latin America            Sichuan.
     in Richard M. Morse, “Trends and Patterns of Latin American                 21 An exception to this generalization appears to be the Beijing-
     Urbanization, 1750–1920,” Comparative Studies in Society and History           Tianjin area, which is a region of intense mixture of crops. Since
     16 (1974) 416-47; and Richard M. Morse, “The Development of                    1949, the southern part of the Shenyang-Dalian region has become
     Urban Systems in the Americas in the Nineteenth Century,” Journal              an important area of rice production. The identification of “rice-
     of Interamerican Studies 17, 1 (1975) 4-26.                                    growing” regions does not preclude the possibility of “mixed crop”
10   See Christopher Baker, “Economic Reorganization and the Slump                  systems developing similar population densities. For example, Polly
     in South and Southeast Asia,” Comparative Studies in Social and                Hill, Dry Grain Farming Families: Hausaland (Nigeria) and Karnataka
     Economic History 23, 2 (1981) 325-49.                                          (India) Compared (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982).
11   The diagram in Figure 9.1 was constructed by Mike Douglass of               22 See Oshima, “The Transition from an Agricultural to an Industrial
     the Department of Urban and Regional Planning, University of                   Economy,” 784.
     Hawaii, and myself during the course of some extended evening               23 Ibid., 785.
     discussions on the subject of the “urban transition.” I am very             24 Clifford Geertz, Agricultural Involution: the Process of Ecological Change
     grateful to him for his constant probing of my ill-formed ideas                in Indonesia (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1963).
     that formed the basis of earlier presentations of this model.               25 Bray, Rice Economies, 135.
     See Mike Douglass, Urbanization and National Urban Development              26 Wang Yaolin’s PhD thesis research on the Shenyang-Dalian region
     Strategies in Asia, Indonesia, Korea, and Thailand, Discussion Paper           is being carried out in the Department of Geography at the
     No. 8 (Honolulu: Department of Urban and Regional Planning,                    University of British Columbia.
     University of Hawaii, 1988).                                                27 See Mike Douglass, Regional Integration on the Capitalist Periphery: the
12   The use of a coined Indonesian term taken from the two words                   Central Plains of Thailand (The Hague: Institute of Social Studies,
     kota (town) and desa (village) was adopted after discussions with              1984); and Mike Douglass, “Population Growth and Policies in
     Indonesian social scientists, because of my belief that there was a            Mega-cities: Calcutta,” Population Policy Paper No. 1 (New York:
     need to look for terms and concepts in the languages of developing             United Nations, 1986).
     countries that reflect the empirical reality of their societies. Reliance   28 Gustav Ranis and Francis Stewart, “Rural Linkages in the
     solely on the language and concepts of Western social science,                 Philippines and Thailand,” Macro-policies for Appropriate Technology in
     which have dominated the analyses of non-Western societies, can                Developing Countries, ed. Frances Stewart (Boulder: Westview Press,
     lead to a form of “knowledge imperialism.” In this text, I have used           1988) 140-91.
     the term desakota, which can be used interchangeably with kotadesa.         29 W. Arthur Lewis, “Economic Development with Unlimited
13   The term “peasant” in this context applies not only to those                   Supplies of Labour,” The Economics of Underdevelopment, ed. H. N.
     farmers who own their land, but also to tenants operating small                Agarwala and S. P. Singh (New York: Oxford University Press,
     units of farmland.                                                             1963) 400-49. See also Geertz, Agricultural Involution; and Pierre
14   Robert E. Baldwin, “Patterns of Development in Newly Settled                   Gourou, L’Asie (Paris: Libraire Hachette, 1953).
     Regions,” The Manchester School of Economic and Social Studies 24 (1956)    30 Yue-man Yeung, “Controlling Metropolitan Growth in Eastern
     161-79; and Douglas Dowd, “A Comparative Analysis of Economic                  Asia,” Geographical Review 76, 2 (1986) 125-37.
     Development in the American West and South,” Journal of Economic            31 John Hariss and Mick Moore, “Editors’ Introduction to Special
     History 16, 7 (1956) 558-74. See also Richard Morse, “Trends and               Issue on Development and the Rural-Urban Divide,” The Journal of
     Patterns”; and Morse, “Urban Systems in the Americas.”                         Development Studies 20, 3 (1984) 1-4.
15   Harry T. Oshima, “The Transition From an Agricultural to an                 32 Michael Lipton, “Urban Bias Revisited,” The Journal of Development
     Industrial Economy in East Asia,” Economic Development and Cultural            Studies 20, 3 (1984) 139-66, specifically 155.
     Change 34, 4 (1986) 783-810.
16   Graeme Hugo, Population Mobility in West Java, Indonesia (PhD
     dissertation, Canberra: Australian National University, 1975);              Figure Credits
     Patrick Guiness, Harmony and Hierarchy in a Javanese Kampong
                                                                                 9.1       Original by Mike Douglass and the author.
     (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986); and Ali Ahmad,
                                                                                 9.2       Original by author.
     Agricultural Stagnation and Population Pressure: The Case of Bangladesh
                                                                                 9.3       Original by author.
     (New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House, 1984).
17   Yujiro Hayami, A Century of Agricultural Growth in Japan
     (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1976); Otohiko
     Hasumi, “Rural Society in Postwar Japan, Part 1,” The Japan
     Foundation Newsletter 12, 5 (1985) 1-10; Otohiko Hasumi, “Rural
     Society in Postwar Japan, Part 2,” The Japan Foundation Newsletter
     12, 6 (1985) 1-7; Norihiko Nakai, “Urbanization Promotion and
     Control in Metropolitan Japan,” Planning Perspectives 3 (1988) 783-
     810; John Lewis, “Metropolitan Japan,” Planning Perspectives 3 (1988)
     783-810; and John Lewis, “The Real Security Issue: Rice,” Far
     Eastern Economic Review (19 June 1981) 70-1.
18   Alden Speare, Paul Lie and Ching-lung Tsay, eds. Urbanization and
     Development: the Rural-Urban Transition in Taiwan (Boulder: Westview
     Press, 1988).
19   See Daniel Todd and Yi-Chung Hsueh, “Taiwan: Some Spatial
     Implications of Rapid Economic Growth,” Geoforum 19, 2 (1988)
     133-45; and Jack F. Williams, “Urban and Regional Planning in
     Taiwan: the Quest for Balanced Regional Development,” Tijschrift
     voor Economische en Social Geografie 79, 3 (1988) 175-87.
20   I am grateful to Rex Casinader and Wang Yaolin, PhD candidates
     in the Department of Geography at the University of British
     Columbia, for information on developments in South India and
