[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: book/M07-levine-grengs-merlin-2019-from-mobility-to-accessibility-transforming-urban-transportation-and-land-use-planning-no-doi.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Producer:        iTextSharp 5.1.3 (c) 1T3XT BVBA
CreationDate:    Mon Nov 25 13:48:05 2019 WIB
ModDate:         Mon Nov 25 13:48:05 2019 WIB
Custom Metadata: no
Metadata Stream: no
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            none
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           237
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       432 x 648 pts
Page rot:        0
File size:       5462706 bytes
Optimized:       no
PDF version:     1.4
[Extracted Text]
FROM MOBILITY TO
ACCESSIBILITY
FROM
MOBILITY TO
ACCESSIBILITY
Transforming Urban Transportation
and Land-Use Planning


                                 Jonathan Levine
                                      Joe Grengs
                                  Louis A. Merlin




CORNELL UNIVERSITY PRESS   ITHACA AND LONDON
Copyright © 2019 by Cornell University

All rights reserved. Except for brief quotations in a review, this book, or parts
thereof, must not be reproduced in any form without permission in writing from
the publisher. For information, address Cornell University Press, Sage House,
512 East State Street, Ithaca, New York 14850. Visit our website at cornellpress.
cornell.edu.

First published 2019 by Cornell University Press

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Levine, Jonathan (Jonathan C.), author. | Grengs, Joe, 1962– author. |
  Merlin, Louis A., 1972– author.
Title: From mobility to accessibility : transforming urban transportation
  and land-use planning / Jonathan Levine, Joe Grengs, Louis A. Merlin.
Description: Ithaca [New York] : Cornell University Press, 2019. | Includes
  bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2019015736 (print) | LCCN 2019018066 (ebook) |
  ISBN 9781501716102 (pdf) | ISBN 9781501716096 (epub/mobi) |
  ISBN 9781501716072 | ISBN 9781501716072 (cloth ; alk. paper) |
  ISBN 9781501716089 (pbk. ; alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Urban transportation—Planning. | Urban transportation—
  United States—Planning. | Land use, Urban—Planning. | Land use,
  Urban—United States—Planning. | City planning. | City planning—
  United States.
Classification: LCC HE305 (ebook) | LCC HE305 .L48 2019 (print) |
  DDC 388.4068/4—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2019015736
Dedicated in loving memory

Rose Aronowitz Levine
Hillel Benjamin Levine
Judith Langer Merlin
Contents




      Acknowledgments                                          ix
      List of Abbreviations                                    xi


           Introduction: The Accessibility Shift               1

      1. What Is Transportation For?                          18

      2. Evolution of the Accessibility Concept               35

      3. Accessibility in Everyday Planning                   47

      4. Accessibility and Urban Form                         71

      5. The Special Case of Public-Transport Accessibility   86

      6. Accessibility in Social-Equity Evaluation            101

      7. Nonwork Accessibility                                124

           Conclusion: Envisioning the Accessibility Shift    136


      Appendix A: Procedure for Accessibility Analysis
      for Land-Use Projects                                   159
      Appendix B: Variables Used in the Text                  173
      Notes                                                   177
      Bibliography                                            199
      Index                                                   219
Acknowledgments




We are grateful to the many individuals and organizations that helped make this
book possible. Indispensable institutional support came from the Rockefeller
Foundation Bellagio Center, the Environmental Protection Agency, the Graham
Sustainability Institute, the Dow Sustainability Postdoctoral Fellowship, the Fed-
eral Highway Administration, the NEXTRANS Center, and the Taubman College
of Architecture and Urban Planning at the University of Michigan. Data were
generously contributed by the City of Ann Arbor, the Accessibility Observatory
at the University of Minnesota, the Southeast Michigan Council of Governments,
the Alamo Area Metropolitan Planning Organization, and dozens of other MPOs
around the United States.
    Research findings in chapter 3 were previously published in Jonathan Levine,
Louis Merlin, and Joe Grengs, “Project-Level Accessibility Analysis for Land-Use
Planning,” Transport Policy 53 (2017): 107–19, and in Louis A. Merlin, Jonathan
Levine, and Joe Grengs, “Accessibility Analysis for Transportation Projects and
Plans,” Transport Policy 69 (2018): 35–48. Research findings in chapter 4 were
previously published in Jonathan Levine, Joe Grengs, Qingyun Shen, and Qing
Shen, “Does Accessibility Require Density or Speed?: A Comparison of Fast ver-
sus Close in Getting Where You Want to Go in U.S. Metropolitan Regions,” Jour-
nal of the American Planning Association 78, no. 2 (2012): 157–72. All used by
permission.
    Qing Shen and Qingyun Shen were our partners in much of the research
reported in chapters 4 and 7, and Qingyun provided brilliant assistance
throughout much of the empirical research of the book. We benefited from
superb research assistance as well from Matan Singer, Alexandra Markiewicz,
Doug Koloszvari, Jason Enos, Patrick Dieter, Arthur Prokosch, Wenting Chen,
and Chao Liu. Zachary Graham, from the Alamo Area Metropolitan Plan-
ning Organization, provided assistance with data and modeling. Guillaume
Barreau programmed a website to render methods in chapter 3 accessible to
planners in practice. Prashanth Raju enhanced the consistency and clarity of
the graphics. Two anonymous reviewers and our editor, Michael McGandy,
offered constructive feedback that greatly improved the draft. Julie Steiff simi-
larly improved the text with her professional editing, and we benefited from
comments on previous drafts from colleagues, students, and family including


                                                                       ix
x       ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


Jacob Yan, Matan Singer, Adam Levine, Rob Goodspeed, Adam Millard-Ball,
Deena Levine, and Michael Lipsett.
   Finally, our gratitude goes to Noga Morag-Levine, Suzanne Copsey, and
Ki-Wing Merlin for their loving support throughout the process of creating
this book.
Abbreviations




BRT      Bus Rapid Transit
CEQA     California Environmental Quality Act
EIR      Environmental Impact Report
EJ       Environmental Justice
FHWA     Federal Highway Administration
FTA      Federal Transit Administration
GTFS     General Transit Feed Specification
LOS      Level of Service
LRT      Light Rail Transit
MAP-21   Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century Act
MPO      Metropolitan Planning Organization
MRCOG    Mid-Region Council of Governments
MSA      Metropolitan Statistical Area
NAICS    North American Industry Classification System
NEPA     National Environmental Policy Act
NHTS     National Household Travel Survey
NMDOT    New Mexico Department of Transportation
NTD      National Transit Database
SMART    System Management and Allocation of Resources for Transportation
TAZ      Traffic Analysis Zone
TIGER    Transportation Investment Generating Economic Recovery
TIP      Transportation Improvement Plan
VKT      Vehicle-Kilometers Traveled
VRM      Vehicle Revenue Miles




                                                               xi
FROM MOBILITY TO
ACCESSIBILITY
Introduction

THE ACCESSIBILITY SHIFT




Imagine that you have a list of tasks to accomplish that requires you to travel
to a number of destinations today: work, shopping, day care, and maybe a res-
taurant or cinema. Unlike a typical day, today you have the freedom to choose
between two metropolitan areas to meet these ordinary needs. While both
regions host the full range of destinations, the first region boasts more rapid
surface travel—less congestion, faster highways, and more rapid transit—than
the second. The second has slower travel, but your destinations are closer to
your starting point and to one another, such that you can accomplish your
task list with less investment of time and money. Based solely on your ability
to travel quickly, region number one would seem to be the better choice. But
knowledge about travel speeds would not give you a complete picture of your
ability to meet your needs in that region; the relative locations of your destina-
tions would matter as well. If you choose the second region because its closer
destinations more than offset the slower travel it supports, you are selecting the
higher-accessibility option.
   Ironically, you are choosing the region that current transportation-planning
methods identify as problematic.1 Since the mid-twentieth century, transporta-
tion outcomes, together with the transportation dimension of land use, have
largely been planned and evaluated within a framework based not in accessibility,
but in mobility. Faster movement, particularly by cars, is treated as the central
goal, without attention to accessibility as an outcome. In this book we advocate


                                                                       1
2        INTRODUCTION


a shift from mobility to accessibility as the basis for transportation and land-
use planning, arguing that such a shift (a) is compelled by the very purpose
of transportation; (b) would be transformative to the practices of both trans-
portation planning and land-use planning; but (c) is impeded by numerous
misconceptions. The misconceptions constitute impediments to the mobility-to-
accessibility shift, termed here “the accessibility shift,” impediments we seek to
help overcome.



Accessibility and Mobility
The concepts of accessibility and mobility are readily distinguished by consider-
ing what would count as an improvement in each.2 An improvement in mobility
is an increase in the territory that can be reached for a given investment of time
and money, while an improvement in accessibility is an increase in the destina-
tions that can be reached for a given investment of time and money. To be more
precise, destinations vary in their value; most people would appreciate access to
a supermarket more than to a convenience store, for example. So an accessibility
improvement is more precisely defined as an increase in the value of destina-
tions that can be reached for a given investment of time and money. Physical
accessibility, the focus of this book, refers to the potential for traveling to actual
destinations, but the concept can be broadened to accessibility more generally by
including remote electronic interaction with virtual destinations and delivery of
goods and services to one’s location. While physical accessibility varies widely by
travel mode, it is equally relevant to auto drivers, public-transport riders, pedes-
trians, and cyclists; it is the principal service that people seek from transporta-
tion regardless of the means they choose. And though improving accessibility
may help further planning goals including social equity, environmental perfor-
mance, and multimodalism—and may be motivated in part by the struggle to
achieve them—accessibility is not equivalent to those goals. Accessibility has, in
some cases, become a shorthand for a long wish list of desirable transportation
outcomes; we reject this expansive view in favor of the more limited, and more
workable, definition given here.
    Reliance on mobility as a guiding planning principle is evidenced in cur-
rent policy and in the physical form of the built environment in metropolitan
areas in the United States and many other countries around the world. When
evaluating the performance of a transportation system, the fundamental crite-
rion for success has long been faster vehicle-operating speed.3 Common indica-
tors of this include delay per capita, dollars wasted while waiting in traffic, and
                                                   THE ACCESSIBILITY SHIFT      3


highway level-of-service.4 These mobility metrics are not simply after-the-fact
assessments but are also used proactively to guide policy toward transportation
investment and land-use regulation.5 On the ground, this often translates into a
singular focus on fast and wide highways and land-use regulations that strive to
forestall traffic congestion by limiting allowable development heights or densi-
ties, a combination of policies that can increase metropolitan travel distances by
inducing an increasing spread of origins and destinations.6
    This focus on mobility stands in contrast to a cornerstone of modern trans-
portation planning: the notion that the demand for transportation is largely
derived from the demand to reach destinations.7 Economists refer to a derived
demand as a demand for an intermediate good or service that occurs as a result
of the demand for a final good or service. Examples include fertilizer purchased
by farmers in order to grow crops or electrical power consumed in order to
attain desired services such as illumination or computing power. Evaluating
farmers’ productivity with metrics of fertilizer consumption rather than crop
production would be an obvious error that, if used to guide decision making,
would surely lead to bad policy. Transportation planning is largely built on a
similar error, because the derived-demand view, a consensus across the trans-
portation professions, implies that mobility is primarily a means in transporta-
tion rather than an end.
    If the goal that drives current transportation planning—mobility—differs
from the service that people seek from transportation—accessibility—the plan-
ning process would tend to overprovide the former and underprovide the latter.
The transportation and land-use systems would require a high degree of per-
son and vehicle movement to overcome the great distances between origins and
destinations. A shift to an accessibility logic would add proximity to the lexicon
and tool kit of the transportation planner. Where mobility-based transporta-
tion planning has been largely indifferent to the distance between origins and
destinations, a shift toward accessibility would seek to create gains for current
and future residents through mobility and proximity in combination. Aligning
the logic of transportation planning with the core purpose of transportation is
about ensuring that people get more of what they want out of the system: access
to destinations.
    And the observation that transportation demand is derived is in fact a func-
tion of people and what they want. Transportation demand is not derived as a
matter of definition or axiom; if people were observed to behave as if they were
usually seeking movement for its own sake when they travel, the derived-demand
conclusion would be unsupported. While some travel is clearly for the sake of
movement, the empirical evidence strongly supports the idea that, for a large
4        INTRODUCTION


majority of trips, time spent in travel is a cost that people bear in order to reap
the benefits available at their destinations (see chapter 1).



Derived Demand and the Accessibility Shift
The derived nature of most transportation demand (which we will refer to
as the derived-demand framework) is not at all controversial. Quite the opposite:
this fundamental concept is embedded throughout mainstream transportation-
planning methods.8 For example, travel-demand models rely on the arrangement
of land-use patterns across a region to forecast travel flows; this capacity to fore-
cast travel largely on the basis of the spatial arrangement of origins and destina-
tions is a direct outgrowth of the derived-demand framework.9 If transportation
were undertaken simply for the purpose of movement, then the ease with which
destinations could be reached would not be a useful predictor of trip making in
travel-demand models.
    Derived demand is also at the core of traditional cost-benefit evaluation
methods for transportation planning. Consider, for example, a bypass route
that allows travelers to reach their destination more quickly. Cost-benefit analy-
sis considers the travelers’ time savings to be the principal relevant benefit of
the infrastructure investment. After the investment, the travelers “consume” less
mobility because they can now take a more direct route to their destination.
If movement itself were the service travelers desired, switching to a shorter high-
way route would represent people’s consuming less of what they want; it would
paradoxically be considered a harm rather than a benefit. The derived-demand
framework avoids this dilemma by viewing mobility correctly as an intermedi-
ate service that is consumed for the sake of reaching one’s destination; in this
way derived demand is implicit in all realms in transportation planning and
policy.
    But while the fields of transportation planning, engineering, and econom-
ics are all based on this destination-oriented view of transportation, there is
an implication that they have too rarely confronted. If the demand for travel is
indeed mostly derived, then assessments of the quality or speed of movement,
when performed in isolation, cannot reveal the extent to which people’s trans-
portation needs are being met. Such an assessment would need to change to one
based on people’s capacity to reach destinations, a function of both the speed of
their travel and destination proximity, not just their ease of movement. In this
way, the accessibility shift, a definition of what constitutes success in transporta-
tion, is compelled as a matter of logic by the derived nature of transportation
demand, which is a matter of empirical human experience.
                                                     THE ACCESSIBILITY SHIFT       5


   This accessibility shift would align transportation and land-use planning with
thinking in other professions. For example, site selection for retail facilities has
for decades been driven by accessibility considerations.10 The real-estate truism
that the components of value are “location, location, location” is, in large part,
an accessibility-related assertion, and measured accessibility has in fact long been
a key component of land-value models.11 Real estate agents know that people
frequently express appreciation for their home and neighborhood on the basis
of the destinations reachable from them; rarely do they express the appreciation
based on the travel speeds on the roadways serving their locales. The accessibility
shift does not require transportation and land-use planners to convince others to
begin to act in an accessibility-aware fashion; it does, however, demand reform of
the principles and norms of the profession itself.
   Neither does the shift represent new governmental intervention into markets.
The practice of transportation and land-use planning, with its massive public
investment in transportation infrastructure, detailed and prescriptive regulation
of land use through municipal zoning and subdivision controls, and reliance on
tools including taxation, eminent domain, and subsidy, is inherently an exercise
in governmental intervention into markets.12 The accessibility shift seeks to align
that ubiquitous intervention with transportation’s purpose.
   Grounding the accessibility shift in the derived-demand framework contrasts
with some traditions in accessibility-related thinking. The primary benefit of
the accessibility shift is increasing people’s capacity to reach destinations, yet
accessibility is frequently seen first and foremost as a means to yield other, ancil-
lary benefits aligned with current policy imperatives: reductions in vehicle kilo-
meters traveled (VKT) and attendant pollution and greenhouse-gas emissions;
improvements in the equity of the transportation and land-use system; increases
in active transportation including walking and cycling; containment of metro-
politan sprawl; or even reductions in roadway congestion.13 All these outcomes
are desirable, and many of them may plausibly be aided by a shift from mobility
to accessibility as the central framework of transportation and land-use plan-
ning. They may even be the prime motivators for many who might seek a shift to
accessibility-based planning.
   But evidence of accessibility’s ancillary benefits, however welcome, ought
not to be the desirability test of, or necessary precondition for, the accessibility
shift. To see this, consider the universe of mobility-increasing actions. Some of
them will increase accessibility, while others will leave accessibility unchanged
or even degrade it. If the purpose of most travel is reaching destinations, the lat-
ter two sets of actions fail to further that purpose (and the last undermines it).
Hence the derived-demand framework implies rejection of a mobility criterion
for transportation success when considered in isolation. By contrast, consider the
6        INTRODUCTION


universe of accessibility-increasing actions. Some will improve mobility, while
others will leave it unchanged or even degrade it. All of them, however, would
further transportation’s purpose by improving people’s ability to reach destina-
tions. This is sufficient to establish their transportation benefit; any benefits in
other realms would be a bonus. In this way, accessibility is much more than one
desirable framework, a “politically attractive concept,” as Ilan Salomon and Patri-
cia Mokhtarian assert, or Gerald Houseman’s “handy term to use in discussions
of mobility . . . quite popular among . . . environmentally conscious writers.”14
The derived-demand framework implies that accessibility is an inherent benefit
apart from any ancillary benefits it might also provide. This idea is the derived-
demand rationale for the accessibility shift.15
    The inherent, rather than instrumental, view of the accessibility shift faces
a significant obstacle. Concerns about environmental performance, human
health, or congestion are institutionalized through government agencies at
various levels, nongovernmental organizations, and private-sector mobiliza-
tion. By contrast, there are few integrated transportation/land-use agencies,
or “departments of accessibility,” that would be well positioned to champion
the accessibility shift. For this reason, the temptation to condition the shift on
already-institutionalized concerns is great. But that linkage comes at a cost:
while evidence of these ancillary gains can add political urgency to the acces-
sibility shift, such conditioning implies that scientific uncertainty regarding
accessibility’s purported benefits in areas such as emissions reductions or
health improvements—an ever-present feature of large societal questions such
as these—would be an argument against the shift. Yet rejecting the accessibility
shift does not amount to a neutral default, but rather a reversion to mobility-
based planning and evaluation.
    The derived-demand rationale may be particularly important given the time
scales over which behavioral shifts operate. For example, consider the travel-
behavior impacts of developing an individual site in a walkable or transit-friendly
fashion when the regional situation for that neighborhood is auto-oriented. Any
VKT-reduction effects are likely to be slight because so much of the travel from
the neighborhood is to region-wide destinations and will continue to be by car.16
Policy reform in this realm, however, aspires not merely to islands of walkable
urbanism within a sea of sprawl, but to overall transformation in metropolitan-
development trends. Hoped-for reductions in driving are thus much greater than
those that isolated pockets could ever produce (even on a per-capita basis), yet
proof of these greater benefits will always be uncertain in the near term since
cities change slowly. Accessibility is the immediate benefit that can be pursued as
policy reformers seek the more uncertain payoff of long-run driving reductions
based on shifts in patterns of development.
                                                      THE ACCESSIBILITY SHIFT        7


    Our primary argument—that the derived-demand framework compels an
accessibility perspective and establishes accessibility as the appropriate evalua-
tive framework for transportation planning—has not always been evident. For
example, derived demand has been viewed as impeding rather than compelling
the accessibility shift. “Perhaps a major reason that the analysis of accessibility
has not been frequently proposed as a basic component of a social report, is the
common notion that movement is a ‘derived’ demand. . . . It could be argued that
because transportation and physical accessibility constitute means to achieving
ends such as income, health, and education, accessibility need not be singled out
as a component of a set of indicators,” wrote Martin Wachs and Gordon Kumagai
in 1973.17 In other cases, authors cite the derived-demand watchword but fail to
acknowledge its inconsistency with a mobility-based definition of the purposes
of transportation, as Jean-Paul Rodrigue wrote in 2009: “What are the differences
between a Boeing 747, an oil tanker, a car and a bicycle? Extensive indeed, but
they each share the common goal of fulfilling a derived transport demand, and
they thus all fill the purpose of supporting mobility.”18
    Some authors go further, portraying accessibility as a means to mobility
rather than the reverse, despite explicit acknowledgment of derived demand.
“Unsuccessful solutions to this problem [congestion] and the wide recognition
of the effects of accessibility has [sic] resulted in the idea that by improving
accessibility, reductions in congestion . . . could be attained. . . . In this approach
travel is considered a derived demand, which implies that the decision to travel
or not originates from the need to go to a particular destination,” wrote Irene
Casas in 2003.19



A Distinct Relationship between
Accessibility and Mobility
Traditionally, transportation planning and engineering have defined themselves
in mobility terms; transportation investments or policy interventions including
highway-capacity expansion, public-transport deployment, and even land-use
planning are evaluated in terms of their capacity to promote mobility, which
is often interpreted as prevention or alleviation of highway congestion.20 This
focus on mobility needs to be altered in light of the derived-demand framework.
Mobility would become one means to achieve accessibility; other possible path-
ways would be proximity and connectivity (figure I.1). Connectivity here refers
to the delivery of goods and services to one’s location, whether virtually (e.g.,
internet downloads) or physically (e.g., package delivery, traditional utilities).
But mobility and proximity exist in tension with each other. Compact places
8          INTRODUCTION


    ENDS
                                      ACCESSIBILITY


                          (+)                                     (+)
                                          (+)



MEANS            MOBILITY               PROXIMITY              CONNECTIVITY


                                (–)


FIGURE I.1 Relationships among mobility, proximity, connectivity, and
accessibility in a revised hierarchy of transportation goals




with many origins and destinations near one another tend to be locations where
surface transportation is slow; conversely, areas of rapid surface travel tend to be
low-density areas where origins and destinations are more dispersed.
    The relationship between mobility and accessibility runs through urban
form, or the patterns of origins and destinations across a region. It is not obvi-
ous by definition which urban forms offer higher accessibility: areas of rapid
surface travel and low proximity, or areas offering high proximity of origins
and destinations but slower travel. The accessibility impacts of moving from
an area with slow travel and nearby destinations to one with faster travel and
spread-out land uses would be a function of the net effect of speed and distance
change between the regions. For example, if the region with widely spread ori-
gins and destinations had travel speeds for a given mode that more than made
up for its great distances, it would be the higher-accessibility region of the two.
For this reason, as an evaluative framework, accessibility does not inherently
favor any particular urban form, but rather seeks transportation and land-use
systems that support people’s ability to meet their needs through interaction
with their destinations.
    Improved mobility does not guarantee improved accessibility and can even
be associated with degraded accessibility over the long term because of land-use
change. For this reason, current evaluations of transportation outcomes based in
mobility alone suffer from a distinct logical flaw. If the purpose of transportation
is not movement but access, then a mobility improvement that is associated with
degraded accessibility would leave people with less time and money with which
to interact with their destinations, and for that reason could not be viewed as a
transportation-system improvement. While actual impacts would be a matter for
empirical assessment (see chapter 4), the possibility of mobility improvements
                                                    THE ACCESSIBILITY SHIFT       9


that fail to improve, or even degrade, accessibility argue for a reform of the defi-
nition of transportation success.



Accessibility as Potential for Interaction
Accessibility is an intangible potential for interaction as opposed to concrete
revealed travel behavior. It may be difficult to believe that improvements in
the potential for interaction that do not materialize as changes in trip making
can be a meaningful indicator of anything, least of all the quality of a trans-
portation system, but accessibility, rather than revealed travel behavior, is the
meaningful indicator of these benefits. Consider, for example, average com-
muting time—a measure of revealed travel behavior, rather than accessibility—
as a candidate indicator. A low average commuting time might or might not
indicate great benefits from a location, since vastly different areas will dem-
onstrate similar values; for example, at 18.9 minutes, downtown Washington,
DC, and rural Burdett, Kansas (population 247), have identical average com-
mute times.21 These short average times are the products of a concentration of
nearby job locations in the former case, and an absence of commuting oppor-
tunities in the latter; transportation-system benefits accruing to the two would
not be remotely comparable. Another example is found in contrasting travel
behavior by gender. Females in two-breadwinner households commute 33 per-
cent less time on average than their male counterparts; one would not infer
from that statistic that women receive greater transportation-system benefits
than men.22
   The benefit captured by accessibility, as opposed to revealed travel behavior,
may be illustrated with a hypothetical scenario. Consider, for example, two
lovers of Italian food. Both travel once a week to their chosen restaurant. But
while the first restaurant lover has ten such restaurants reachable within a given
time, the second has only one. Though their travel is similar, the benefit each
receives from destinations in the environment differs greatly, across at least five
dimensions.


Choice
On any given evening, the first restaurant lover has more choices than the second.
Even if those choices do not translate into week-to-week variation in the restau-
rant selected, they change the meaning of the experience for the first restaurant
lover. Choosing a destination from ten possible choices is more valuable than
traveling to that same destination due to the lack of options.
10        INTRODUCTION


Variety
If the presence of choice in fact materializes as week-to-week variations in restau-
rant selection, the first restaurant lover is experiencing the value of variety, and
the second is not. Avoiding repetitiveness is, for many people, a component of the
utility that their environment offers them.


Flexibility
People like the first restaurant lover who can reach multiple destinations enjoy
the assurance that, should their circumstances, needs, or tastes change, they will
be able to alter their destinations in response. This capacity is particularly impor-
tant with regard to workplace accessibility. Households choose residential loca-
tions while taking into account accessibility to employment concentrations and
not merely travel time to current job locations. The strategy is a logical response
to the potential for future shifts in life circumstances such as a change in job or
household composition.


Competition
The person who has ten restaurants from which to choose will probably be eating
tastier food during a given evening than the person who has only one. In a similar
fashion, workers who can travel to many potential employers tend to be in a posi-
tion to strike a better deal on wages and working conditions.


Spillovers
The restaurant lover with access to ten restaurants will, in all likelihood, have
ancillary access to neighbors with similar tastes. The potential for interaction
with those neighbors provides spillover benefits beyond simple food enjoyment.
Spillover benefits are of particular importance in the economy of metropolitan
regions, in which the capacity of many people and firms to interact, or agglom-
eration economies, underpins high levels of productivity. Relevant interactions
are not limited to travel to conventional destinations, but include the chance
encounter, the overheard conversation, the ready availability of role models, and
more. While the empirical analyses presented in this book measure accessibility
on the basis of well-defined destinations, spillover benefits extend to the poten-
tial for planned and unplanned interactions of all types.
    For a region, greater potential for interaction is preferable over less for a
given level of externalities, such as crowding or pollution, which can accompany
increasing accessibility. There may be instances in which individuals find little
                                                  THE ACCESSIBILITY SHIFT       11


benefit in added accessibility, as with the addition of the second Starbucks in
the neighborhood or the second Walmart within driving range. For that matter,
access to a supermarket may be of little value to the household that prefers health
food stores. While increases in the value of accessibility to the individual may
well approach the vanishing point, the region as a whole under these scenarios
benefits from increased accessibility in the form of potential interactions with
coffee shops, discount retailers, or food stores.



Obstacles to the Accessibility Shift
The accessibility concept was brought into the urban planning field by Robert
Murray Haig and later by Walter Hansen and has been the subject of, or a tool for,
a virtual cottage industry of academic researchers ever since.23 But in practice,
accessibility metrics are used sparingly and have not supplanted their mobility
counterparts in transportation evaluation. While practitioners have tentatively
begun to use the language of accessibility, its application remains largely at the
conceptual and visioning levels.
    The transition to accessibility-based planning will not be complete—in fact, it
cannot even really begin—until accessibility-based performance measures sup-
plant metrics such as highway level of service in evaluating transportation suc-
cess and guiding transportation and land-use decision making. Yet the transfer of
accessibility-based evaluation to planning and engineering practice and decision
making has been impeded by a family of interrelated obstacles.24 Many of these
are rooted in external political factors, including the scale mismatch between
municipal land-use planning and regional transportation planning, entrenched
interests of people and institutions that benefit from mobility-based transporta-
tion planning, and traditions of localist control.
    Other obstacles are more within the purview of transportation and land-use
planners and researchers themselves; these are rooted in conceptual and ana-
lytical challenges associated with accessibility. The most obvious is the relative
complexity of accessibility metrics, especially when compared with their mobil-
ity counterparts. Measures like traffic speeds, highway level of service, and time
lost in congestion are directly observable and unidimensional constructs that
have the added advantage of being interpretable in easy-to-grasp terms like speed
or hours. By contrast, accessibility is concerned with the people and places that
transportation systems serve. Accessibility metrics therefore incorporate, at a
minimum, attributes of the transportation and land-use systems.25 This tends to
render them more difficult to gauge and to interpret than many of those based
in mobility.
12         INTRODUCTION


    But the obstacle of analytic complexity is diminishing. With increasing
sophistication and distribution of tools for spatial analysis, together with spa-
tial datasets, planners’ technical capacity to evaluate accessibility can lower this
barrier and potentially eliminate it altogether. Moreover, the needed inputs for
accessibility metrics are regularly developed as part of travel-demand modeling
at the regional level, a mainstay of transportation planning in many countries
around the world. Thus, the technology, data, and methods for a significant shift
to accessibility-based transportation planning are readily available.
    On a broader level, the accessibility shift is impeded by institutional factors.
For example, mobility models and metrics persist in their central role in trans-
portation and land-use policy in part because they represent professional norms
in the transportation fields. Highway level of service is a central metric of trans-
portation engineering practice and is codified and updated regularly through
the Transportation Research Board’s Highway Capacity Manual.26 Land-use
decisions are constrained by adequate public facilities ordinances or statewide
concurrency requirements mandating traffic-impact analysis, a technique whose
methods are codified by the Institute of Transportation Engineers.27 Practitio-
ners bound to uphold their professional norms by legal or ethical constraints, or
simple convention, would find themselves hard-pressed to deviate from estab-
lished standards such as these.
    While acknowledging these obstacles, we focus on conceptual impediments
that stem from beliefs about what accessibility is or ought to be, or what would
count as evidence in favor of the accessibility shift. Since these barriers are largely
internal to urban- and transportation-planning discourse, they are perhaps more
readily overcome than the external obstacles.


Travel-Cost Minimization Fallacy
The validity of the derived-demand concept and the accessibility paradigm is
sometimes presumed to require that people choose residential locations, routes,
modes, or destinations so as to minimize transportation costs (see chapter 1).
Yet nothing in derived demand or the accessibility concept requires that transpor-
tation costs trump all other considerations related to travel or residential location
choice. The fact that travelers may choose more travel than the bare minimum
because of concerns about the quality of opportunities at their destinations, or
the desired characteristics of their homes and neighborhoods, is evidence that
they weigh the impulse to reduce travel costs against other attributes of the trip.
It is neither evidence that travel is undertaken for its own sake nor evidence
against the notion that access to destinations is the service that most travelers
seek from their transportation systems.
                                                   THE ACCESSIBILITY SHIFT        13


Accessibility-as-Urbanism Fallacy
“Accessibility” sometimes stands for a set of investments and policies that pro-
mote pedestrianism, cycling, transit use, and compact development.28 Its coun-
terpart, “mobility,” stands in this formulation for priority given to vehicular
movement, highway investments, and auto-oriented development patterns. But
an investment in automotive infrastructure can be accessibility increasing, and
dense development can potentially degrade accessibility if it slows movement
down too much. Moreover, even if one assumes that most urbanist policies are
accessibility increasing, it does not follow that most accessibility-increasing poli-
cies are urbanist. Ironically, an equation by definition between accessibility and
urbanist policies has been promoted by some accessibility advocates themselves,
and in doing so, they have unwittingly enabled a stereotype of accessibility as
relevant to a niche market rather than the theoretically sound alternative to
mobility-based transportation planning (see chapter 2). As a practical matter,
denser regions in the United States tend in fact to offer more accessibility than
their lower-density counterparts (see chapter 4), but this is a matter of empirical
observation rather than definition.


Positive vs. Normative Accessibility
The view that accessibility promotion is inherently valuable as a normative goal—
rather than just a predictive variable—has at times been controversial. Social sci-
entists in general are more comfortable with analysis and prediction than with
prescription, and scholars have been more inclined to use measured accessibil-
ity as a predictive variable in complex models of land use, real-estate prices, or
travel behavior than to transform planning practice (see chapter 2).29 Researchers
develop increasingly sophisticated accessibility metrics based on ever more fine-
grained spatial data, but their focus on modeling exercises implicitly assumes
either that others will make the link from the laboratory to practice or that mea-
sured accessibility has little to do with the professional practice of planning or
transportation engineering. By contrast, we seek to model accessibility analyses
that are designed to support planning and policy by explicitly framing policy-
relevant variables in applied models where accessibility is the dependent variable
or outcome of interest, rather than an independent variable (see chapters 3–8).


Scenario- versus Project-Based Accessibility
Embedding accessibility as a normative planning goal entails an additional ana-
lytical shift. Formal accessibility analyses began to appear broadly in professional
14         INTRODUCTION


planning practice in the first two decades of the twenty-first century, commonly
at the level of the region or metropolitan area as part of an informational, advi-
sory, or visioning effort. While these efforts represent a step toward the acces-
sibility shift, they leave a particular gap at the level of applied decision making
about transportation investment and land-use regulation. At the operative level,
as when a municipality evaluates a development proposal, or a transportation
agency evaluates transportation-investment plans, decisions tend to be guided by
mobility-based level-of-service or traffic-impact analysis. The accessibility shift
depends on accessibility-based evaluation displacing its mobility counterparts
at these operational levels as well as in the regional visioning processes. Yet project-
level analysis differs in fundamental ways from regional-scenario analysis of
accessibility, and it demands adaptation of the regionally scaled tools (see chapter 3).
With accessibility tools scaled to the level of the individual transportation-
investment or land-use-regulatory decision, accessibility analysis can be brought
to the applied decision-making level.


Comprehensive versus Partial Accessibility
Metrics of accessibility are sometimes judged by their comprehensiveness, with
richer description being treated as inherently superior or more accurate than
sparser representations. For example, access to health care is not just a matter of
people’s ability to reach the doorstep of the clinic, but is shaped by their aware-
ness that they need to see a doctor, the kind of health insurance they have, and
their ability to overcome any societal forces impeding their ability to get the care
they need.30 Thinking about accessibility in this comprehensive way may make
aggregate place-based measures appear to be woefully inadequate descriptors of
people’s actual lived accessibility. To capture accessibility properly, perhaps only
the comprehensive person-based measures, which take into account people’s
attributes and destination types, will do.31 This view misconstrues the nature of
accessibility, which is not an objectively existing quantity like length or weight to
be measured with either greater or lesser accuracy. Accessibility metrics are more
like eyeglass prescriptions: they enable users to see things that would otherwise
be missed, but only where there is an appropriate fit between the tool and both
the user and the user’s purpose. Transportation and land-use planners, for exam-
ple, need guidance regarding transportation investment and land-use regulation
to improve physical access to health-care facilities. Health-care obstacles rooted
in knowledge, finance, or culture, while vital, are generally beyond their profes-
sional purview. The metrics presented in this book (see chapters 3–7) are all
geared toward the professional practice of transportation and land-use planning
                                                   THE ACCESSIBILITY SHIFT        15


and are hence aggregate and place-based. Other normative or positive uses of
accessibility will lead to different methodological choices.


Impact on Complementary System
Accessibility is a function of the interaction of two systems, transportation
and land use, that influence each other. A thorough accessibility analysis must
therefore allow for the possibility of effects on the complementary system—
transportation on land use, or vice versa—before accessibility impacts are
gauged. For example, assessing the accessibility impact of land development
without accounting for the development’s potential effect on roadway conges-
tion would implicitly presume that roadway level of service would be unaf-
fected by the land-use change; the analysis would thus amount to a proximity
evaluation. By the same token, assessing the accessibility of a set of transpor-
tation investments without first projecting their land-use impact amounts to
assuming no land-use change. Incorporating impacts on the complementary
system ensures that accessibility analyses properly address both the proximity
and mobility dimensions.


Modal Dimension
The accessibility paradigm in transportation and land-use planning has become
closely associated with both multimodalism and an equity-based view of trans-
portation. We view the accessibility shift as a potential tool for furthering these
goals, but as conceptually distinct from them. The accessibility shift implies
planning-practice reform for all transportation modes, including the automo-
bile. An analysis of auto versus transit accessibility, for example, might lead one
to conclude that there is an unacceptable deficit in transit service; however, the
accessibility shift constitutes reform in the kinds of outcomes that matter for the
various modes, not in a fixed position on the priority to be accorded to each.
For example, access to the public transit system is sometimes used as a metric of
accessibility, an inadequate formulation on two grounds. First, it removes the
automobile (and, for that matter, walking and bikes) from the realm of accessibility-
relevant transportation modes. Second, it conflates access to the transit system
with access to destinations. The bus may run through one’s neighborhood, but
if job centers are two hours away, work accessibility remains poor. For all these
issues, analysis of transit accessibility poses particular challenges, as the partial
coverage and intermittent nature of public transit render it a tricky subject for
accessibility analysis (see chapter 5).32
16         INTRODUCTION


Equity Dimension
In this way, the accessibility shift does not imply preference of one mode over
another, but is an approach to planning that is relevant to all modes. Neither is
accessibility synonymous with transportation equity. Logically, accessibility must
be a concept distinct from the equitable distribution of accessibility. One expres-
sion of this equity fallacy is seen in a tendency to limit accessibility analysis to
the transportation disadvantaged, as if accessibility is the service needed by these
populations, in contrast to the more affluent car drivers, who need mobility.
While car ownership enables higher accessibility than transit use nearly every-
where, accessibility remains the service sought by transportation users across
modes and incomes. Accessibility is a resource that is the desired benefit provided
by transportation; that resource can be distributed equitably or inequitably. All
populations benefit when their accessibility increases, though some populations
start from a position of greater accessibility deficit. Under the accessibility shift,
transportation analysis focuses on system performance with respect to popula-
tions rather than with respect to pieces of infrastructure. The accessibility shift
thereby supports analyses of equity issues, which can help direct resources to
equity concerns (see chapter 6).

In this book, the accessibility shift is thus quite circumscribed. Rather than asking
the traditional question “How fast can people travel?,” accessibility planners ask
“How many opportunities can people reach?” The shift does not imply that acces-
sibility maximization is the criterion for a successful metropolitan area; accessi-
bility goals necessarily compete for priority with those of other realms such as
education, health, or economic development. The shift merely implies that, to
the extent that a region seeks to improve its transportation, outcomes will be
evaluated (prospectively and retrospectively) in terms of accessibility rather than
mobility. Similarly, the accessibility shift does not automatically resolve conflicts
among modes; for example, improvements in transit accessibility do not neces-
sarily outweigh improvements in auto accessibility. Similar conflicts may arise
between local and regional accessibility, or between the accessibility of various
socioeconomically or geographically defined groups. Some areas may choose to
ensure a minimum level of accessibility for all populations; other regions might
prioritize the accessibility of highly skilled labor to their key industries.33 Appro-
priate problem definitions do not automatically resolve planning problems, but
logically incorrect definitions, such as those defining transportation’s goals in
mobility terms, regularly lead to misdirection of planning and policy efforts.
    Ultimately, advocacy of both the accessibility shift and its derived-demand
logic is grounded in the notion that ideas matter and have the capacity to
                                                  THE ACCESSIBILITY SHIFT       17


transform even formidable interests and institutions. Political interests and
power undeniably shape policy, and transportation and land-use planners will
inevitably incorporate a “muddling through” as they cope with the constraints
imposed by budgets, stakeholders’ conflicting interests and values, and the
natural and social worlds.34 But the mobility paradigm which currently under-
pins that messiness in turn shapes the arguments, analyses, and assumptions of
planning practice. By altering the terms of debate, the accessibility shift can aid
policy reform even in the face of established interests and constraints on deci-
sion making. This is particularly so when the ideas are readily transformed into
operational tools for on-the-ground decision making within a professional
realm, such as transportation and land-use planning, that is well acquainted
with the use of analytical methods.
                                                                    1
WHAT IS TRANSPORTATION FOR?




The derived-demand concept, which underpins the logic of accessibility in trans-
portation and land-use planning, originated in realms entirely removed from
transportation. Understanding the framework in general can shed light on its
use in transportation and can help eliminate misunderstandings of the mean-
ing of derived demand in the transportation context. In this chapter, we trace
the lineage of the concept, its application to the transportation context, and an
important challenge to the derived view of transportation demand.
   The original example of derived demand—though not the term itself—
was the nineteenth-century mathematician Augustin Cournot’s analysis of the
demand for zinc and copper as a function of the demand for brass, an alloy of
the two metals.1 The derived-demand term was coined in 1895 by the economist
Alfred Marshall, who used it to describe the demand curves for goods that were
intermediate to the consumption or production of other goods.2 As an example,
he showed how one could derive the demand for knife handles as the differ-
ence between the demand for finished knives and the demand for knife blades
(neglecting the cost of assembly). Understanding the demand for knives was a
step toward estimating the demand for knife handles. The demand for knives was
direct in that consumers viewed them as a final product; the demand for knife
handles was derived because they were an input.
   This is derived demand in its original form. It is important to note what
the term does not imply. First, there is no implication that knife handles can
never be used for other purposes; surely some will use them as handles for other

         18
                                             WHAT IS TRANSPORTATION FOR?          19


implements, as decorations, or as doorstops. But for most consumers and for
most purposes, the utility of knife handles depends on their use in completed
knives. Second, there is no suggestion that consumers always choose the lowest-
cost handle that can do the job. Some knife consumers will prefer handles that
excel in their level of ornament, ergonomics, or design. Third, some consumers
may even be so enamored of fancy handles that they will accept smaller or less
durable blades in order to afford their preferred handle. None of this contradicts
the derived nature of demand for knife handles: ordinarily, they are not desired
or useful on their own, but as an element of a complete cutting package. And
assessments of a household’s cutting capability would surely be misleading if
they were based on the availability of knife handles rather than knives.
    In transportation, mobility is the knife handle and accessibility the knife. The
first application of Marshall’s derived-demand concept to transportation may
have come four decades later in Michael Bonavia’s 1936 book The Economics of
Transport: “The ultimate demand for transport may thus be derived from that for
the necessities of life, and be correspondingly inelastic. To some extent, therefore,
transport is analogous to other services for which derived demand is very strong
although direct demand is weak or non-existent; for example, justice, police or
national defense.”3
    Bonavia’s grouping of transportation with justice, police, or national defense
appears to conflate derived demand with public goods—goods or services, such
as clean air or national defense, that are freely available to everyone, and for
which the use by one person does not reduce their availability to others.4 In
Bonavia’s account, the problem with derived demand is that it does not fully
reveal itself in a private market. This is not necessarily so. Derived demand,
such as the demand for electricity (or knife handles for that matter), may be
private and fully expressed in markets. Conversely, the demand for public
goods, such as clean air—which markets underprovide—may be direct, rather
than derived.
    Nevertheless, Bonavia’s identification of the derived nature of transporta-
tion demand was prescient. It subordinated transportation to “the necessities
of life,” perhaps a broader formulation than “reaching destinations,” which
later became central to the definition of derived transportation demand. It
portrayed the direct demand for transportation as “weak or non-existent”; thus
even the original importation of the derived-demand concept into transporta-
tion allowed for a minority of travel that was not for the purpose of reaching
destinations.5
    The derived-demand concept in transportation was developed further by
Robert Mitchell and Chester Rapkin, who were interested in forecasting demand
for transportation on the basis of land-use patterns across a metropolitan area.
20        CHAPTER 1


If people travel in order to reach destinations, they reasoned, then the best way
to forecast travel demand would be on the basis of observed land-use patterns,
which define the origins and destinations of people’s trips.6 Mitchell and Rapkin,
like Marshall or Bonavia, were interested in deriving demand for an intermedi-
ate good or service—mobility in this case—from the final, or direct, demand for
accessibility.7
    Though Mitchell and Rapkin presumed that the demand for travel was primar-
ily motivated by the desire to reach destinations, they, like Bonavia, did not think
that destinations alone fully explained travel behavior. Rather, they argued that
destinations can have a range of roles in trip-making decisions. One attribute of a
trip was the “determinateness” of its goal, which Mitchell and Rapkin defined along
two dimensions: the level of intention to accomplish a goal, and the specificity of
the destination. Values for the former dimension ranged from the traveler intend-
ing to accomplish “all of a definite number of known goal events” at one extreme
to “purposeless existence or movement in a goal area” at the other. Notwithstand-
ing the judgmental sound of “purposeless existence,” Mitchell and Rapkin were
interested in descriptions of travel behavior rather than assigning inherent values
to trips. Specificity of the destination ranged from “a known, intended destination
which consists of one or more specific establishments at specific locations,” such as
a mall or downtown, to a more loosely defined “indeterminate destination, which
consists of an indefinitely bounded or centered area.”8
    Similarly, though Mitchell and Rapkin viewed accessibility as a powerful force
shaping locational decisions, they were explicit in their view that it would not
inherently outweigh all other forces: “Although attention in this study is focused
on the manner in which the necessity for movement among establishments influ-
ences the local distribution of land uses, this should not convey the impression
that the other factors are of little, or even of lesser importance.”9
    Thus, while the purpose of most travel was to reach destinations, the trav-
eler, in Mitchell and Rapkin’s view, was no destination-driven automaton. They
understood the derived nature of a demand for travel, like other intermediate
goods or services, to be a relative, not absolute concept. For Mitchell and Rapkin,
it was useful to view most travel as derived because the perspective enabled them
to model travel on the basis of the locations of origins and destinations.
    The relative nature of derived demand can be understood on a broader level
as well. Ultimately, the consumption of any good or service may be conceived
as being in service of a higher purpose. For example, food can be viewed as
sought not for its own sake but for the sake of nutrition, health, or satisfaction;
the line delineating derived from direct demand may be fuzzy. The consensus
view that transportation demand is mostly derived is not an absolute truth but,
rather, is based on the view that transportation is most usefully viewed, in most
                                               WHAT IS TRANSPORTATION FOR?           21


circumstances and for most trips, as one means to an end, rather than an end
in itself. This proposition can be seen in the asymmetrical relationship between
accessibility and mobility: most people would view reaching their destinations
with less movement as preferable for most trips, all else being equal. The opposite
would not be true: reaching fewer destinations for a given level of travel would
usually be seen as a worse outcome.



The Challenge to the Derived-Demand
Hypothesis
The derived-demand hypothesis remained the consensus view of the trans-
portation fields in the decades following Mitchell and Rapkin’s work, but by
the 1990s, some observers were questioning the ostensible absoluteness of the
derived-demand framework in transportation.10 Research in this tradition seeks
to demonstrate that, for many people, time or distance spent in travel repre-
sents a positive utility in and of itself, rather than a cost (or disutility) that needs
to be borne in order to reach a desired destination. This literature effectively
explores the multiple dimensions of transportation and the many ways in which
travelers adapt to, enjoy, and even derive meaning from the process of getting
from point A to point B. It shows the strategies people employ to multitask and
hence reclaim some of the value of time spent in travel. It also demonstrates
that, for many trips, the destination may be a product of the desire for a trip,
rather than the opposite. These challenges to the derived-demand concept have
furthered earlier understandings of travelers and travel as multidimensional and
layered. At the same time, their analyses help illustrate common misconceptions
about derived demand and accessibility, including notions that for transporta-
tion demand to be derived, it must be derived for all possible trips; or that the
derived nature of travel demand rests on people minimizing transportation costs
without regard to other objectives; or that the derived-demand view requires that
people dislike travel.
   Within this line of research, the derived-demand concept has sometimes been
interpreted in an absolutist fashion. For example, Patricia Mokhtarian and Ilan
Salomon argue that travel demand is not as derived as is commonly believed,
stating that “the strict view of travel as a derived demand would hold that the
destination is always 100% primary.”11 This characterization would be consis-
tent neither with derived-demand theory in general nor with transportation
analysis in particular. First, nothing in derived-demand theory would require
that the directly demanded good is the only purpose to which the derived-
demand good can be put; think of Marshall’s knife handles. This view does not
22        CHAPTER 1


comport with Mitchell and Rapkin’s nuanced view of travel. And researchers
have long explicitly allowed for a minority of travel that is for the pleasure of
movement, rather than for the purpose of reaching destinations. In general,
asserting ironclad laws regarding human behavior would be a risky proposition,
and scholars such as Martin Wachs, Gordon Kumagai, and Randall Crane have
carefully avoided such claims:

         The demand for movement is a “derived” demand. Movement is rarely
         considered an end in itself but rather as a cost which is normally born
         [sic] in order to achieve other objectives. Except for pleasure driving we
         normally travel only in order to take advantage of a variety of activities
         which happen to be separated in space.12
             For most purposes, a trip is a derived demand, meaning that people
         typically travel as a means to an end, not as an end in itself.13

    Thus, the derived-demand view as articulated by Marshall, Bonavia, and
transportation researchers following them has not insisted that 100 percent of
travel demand is derived, merely a large majority. Going out for a drive, or pur-
posely taking the long route home, have for decades been acknowledged as excep-
tions to the derived-demand generalization.
    The question remains, however: What would count as evidence of a direct
demand for transportation, as if time or distance spent in travel were a ben-
efit, rather than primarily a means to reach a destination? The observation that
positive attitudes toward travel help explain people’s choices to travel greater
distances would not, since such attitudes may simply explain their tolerance for
travel to more remote destinations.14 While some people are surely more inclined
to travel, Mokhtarian and Salomon’s division of the population into “accessi-
bility inclined” and “mobility inclined” segments is not tenable; few ostensibly
mobility-inclined people who find that their chosen destinations have moved yet
farther away from their home would see themselves better off as a consequence of
the change.15 Similarly, the observation that not all travel choices minimize travel
costs does not provide evidence against derived travel demand. For example, the
observation that an attribute of a route, such as scenic beauty, is sufficient to
induce travelers to spend more time in travel is evidence that travel costs do not
outweigh all other considerations when selecting a route.16 For that matter, travel
costs would not be expected to dominate other considerations when choosing a
place to live, a restaurant to frequent, or a transportation mode.
    To see the fallacy of insisting that derived demand implies travel-cost mini-
mization, consider what such an absolutist view of travel behavior would imply:
travelers determined to take the shortest or lowest-cost route regardless of its
shortcomings. Nothing, including lack of physical safety, deters them from
                                             WHAT IS TRANSPORTATION FOR?         23


travel-cost minimization. One might say of such people that they are placing an
irrationally high priority on travel costs. Imagining that anything short of that
level of determination amounts to a positive utility for travel neglects the vast
middle: people who would be willing to increase their travel time or costs in
order to realize compensating benefits in other areas. Observations of commut-
ing by choice, that is, travel to work by people who have the option to instead stay
at home and telecommute, similarly fail to provide evidence for a broadly held
positive utility of travel.17 Included in the group of commuters by choice may
well be people who enjoy the drive to work—just as it may include people for
whom the face-to-face interaction with colleagues more than justifies the effort.
Thus, observations of this kind shed little light on the question of whether or not
the time spent in travel holds a positive utility for large shares of trips.
    Similarly unenlightening is the observation that few people value stay-at-
home but well-connected immobility, as some authors have aptly explained, pre-
sumably under the assumption that this state of affairs represents the epitome
of accessibility.18 People indeed engage regularly in movement, such as the walk
in the neighborhood after dinner, that is without a destination in mind.19 There
is undoubtedly a human need to move and explore, as this literature asserts, but
physical accessibility—the ability to reach destinations through some combina-
tion of mobility and proximity—raises, rather than lowers, the value of those
activities. Fulfilling the need to move and explore in an area in which destinations
of interest are absent or hard to reach is in general less rewarding, and hence
less attractive, than in an area that offers many destinations to be discovered.
The notion that the human need to move counters the derived nature of travel
demand or the accessibility paradigm is based on the misconception that acces-
sibility’s essence is in the capacity to reduce travel rather than in the ability to
reach destinations.
    Somewhat more systematic evidence of a broadly perceived positive utility
for travel comes from survey findings that the desired length of commute is not
the shortest possible; for example, when asked about the most desirable length of
their commute, median respondents to one survey replied “16 minutes,” which
suggests that they desire some time separation between home and work.20 Per-
haps a nonzero desired commute time indicates a positive utility for travel.
    This interpretation fails, however, on practical as well as theoretical grounds.
From a practical point of view, mean travel time to work in the San Francisco
Bay Area, the site of the survey, was about twenty-nine minutes at the time of
the study; the implication is that the commuter who is worried about too short a
commute would be rare indeed.21 Thus, these survey data do not contradict the
finding that, for a large majority of trips and travelers, a reduction in the time
they spend in commuting would be a benefit, not a cost. Generally speaking,
24         CHAPTER 1


too-long, rather than too-short commutes remain the problem for individuals
and for transportation and land-use planning. This is especially the case in met-
ropolitan regions in which highly productive economies combine with exclu-
sionary municipal land-use policies to constrain commute-reducing options for
many people by reducing the affordability of close-in locations.22
    There is a more fundamental reason to doubt the inference of a positive utility
to travel time, even though people seem to desire some degree of home-work sepa-
ration. Any evidence of such a positive utility would need to systematically net out
the value that travelers find at the origin and destination of their trips, lest benefits
found at either end be conflated with positive utility for travel. Asking respondents
about their desired commute length fails at this task because a zero-minute com-
mute would imply living in the environment of one’s workplace, rather than one’s
own neighborhood. The job might be better accomplished with a question such
as this: “Imagine that you live sixteen minutes from work, your desired commute
time. A shortcut just opened up which enables you to cut your commute by five
minutes. You can take the shortcut and have an eleven-minute commute, or
continue how you had been traveling before, for a sixteen-minute commute.
There’s no difference in attractiveness, interest, or safety between the new route and
the old one. What is your preferred route to work after this change?”
    A broad preference for the longer commute even in the presence of the new
shortcut would constitute evidence against the derived-demand hypothesis. Such
a preference might be expected among a minority of commuters who enjoy ancil-
lary benefits, such as some active travelers who viewed their trip as exercise or
relaxation as well as transportation. It would be surprising, however, if this were
the majority view among drivers and public-transport users. The decisions of
where and how to travel and where to live, work, shop, and recreate are a tightly
connected bundle; only systematic controlling of the value found at the origin
and destination, and along the routes, would be capable of isolating a positive
value for the travel itself.
    Models of mode choice, route choice, residential-location choice, and desti-
nation choice—which are quasi-experimental designs structured to control for
other attributes—all confirm that, for most people and trips, travel time repre-
sents a cost rather than a benefit.23 This finding is observed through the negative
utilities that are consistently estimated for travel time, and, in the mode-choice
case, for the trip as a whole (including its time, cost, transport-mode characteris-
tics, and other attributes) when the value of the destination is excluded. Travelers’
motivation for incurring this cost is clear: the benefit they receive from being able
to interact with their destinations.
    The view that travel time is treated as a cost by most travelers and for most
trips does not require people to dislike the process of travel, and research into the
positive benefits of travel has revealed the many ways in which people in fact enjoy
                                              WHAT IS TRANSPORTATION FOR?          25


their travel time. The burden of travel time may at times “translate into becom-
ing a gift for the individual traveler,” in Juliet Jain and Glen Lyons’s phrase, when
it becomes a respite, an opportunity to pursue desired activities, an adventure,
or a time for mental transition.24 The question is the meaning of these benefits
for travel behavior and for transportation policy. One possibility is that travelers
experiencing such enjoyment would seek more travel over less even if the qualities
of their origins, destinations, modes, and routes are held constant. This possibility
is contradicted by the families of studies we have mentioned, which reveal that,
all else being equal, people seek to reduce, not increase, travel time for most trips.
People may enjoy the time they spend in their cars, but taking the long way home
merely to have more commute time is the rare exception.
    People’s capacity at times to enjoy travel appears to conflict with the rarity
with which they seek more of it in the absence of compensating benefits in their
choice of destinations (e.g., better retail choice), origins (e.g., a more-affordable
house), routes (e.g., scenic quality), or modes (e.g., physical exercise). The appar-
ent contradiction suggests a conditional or contextual nature of the benefit that
people receive from time spent in travel. For example, busy working parents may
enjoy the quiet transition time between work and home, but the legitimacy of—
and hence potential for—that enjoyment rests on having to take the commute
to begin with. Extending the commute merely in order to benefit from more
transition time does not ordinarily work because the condition, having to spend
the time, would not be met.
    Ultimately, research into the benefits of time spent in travel uncovers much
about the transportation (and perhaps human) experience but leaves intact the
derived nature of the majority of travel demand that Bonavia found in 1936.
People who have the choice will often prefer the remote restaurant that has tastier
food or the remote neighborhood that is safer; these observations do not in any
way contradict the accessibility-based idea that the more acceptable neighbor-
hoods or restaurants that can be reached—through any combination of proxim-
ity and mobility—the better off people are.



From Individual Behavior to
Evaluation of Policy
Yet households in the United States and many countries that are able to choose
frequently appear to attach little value to proximity when they opt for large homes
in remote suburban or exurban locations. One might ask why policy should seek
to achieve for people what they do not appear to want on their own. To illustrate
the relevance of the accessibility shift even in the face of residential choices that
in practice appear to increase, rather than minimize the need for travel, consider
26         CHAPTER 1


first a situation in which residential choices are fixed; that is, people do not have
the ability to relocate in response to transportation-system changes. Some house-
holders live in or near their travel-minimizing location; others choose spots
requiring travel above the minimum, presumably because location-related ben-
efits outweigh their transportation costs. Consider a transportation investment
that would speed up their travel by 5 percent but cause their work and nonwork
destinations to shift to places 10 percent more distant. This shift, while improv-
ing their mobility, would degrade their accessibility and would leave them with
less time and money with which to interact with their destinations. This principle
would hold equally for people who had selected neighborhoods that minimized
the travel required to reach their destinations and for people who had located
farther away.
    If the assumption of fixed residential locations is relaxed, the situation
changes, affecting different people in different ways. Public investment to speed
up travel—even if it reduces accessibility—would leave some people freer to
choose larger houses and lots at residential locations farther from their work
and nonwork destinations. People with preferences for, and the ability to afford,
this kind of consumption—especially those with an appetite for long-distance
driving—would benefit from this opportunity; others might be worse off
because their destinations would have become harder to reach.
    Such a policy would amount to a subsidy for private land consumption, rather
than a transportation-improvement strategy.25 With greater mobility—even with
reduced regional accessibility—some people are freer to choose from a greater
range of potential residential locations, are able to consume more land for their
residence, and in the process, are more able to travel when, where, and how
they want.26 But these gains mask societal losses in terms of degraded ability
to reach destinations overall. Moreover, a subsidy to land consumption at the
urban fringe would rarely succeed as a political justification for the expense of
such investment. Instead, the legitimacy of the infrastructure policy rests on the
transportation-system improvement claim that is brought to support it. Under
the accessibility shift, the transportation-improvement rationale for subsidies
that fail to deliver accessibility gains disappears, and their justification in the face
of the significant costs they impose must be sought elsewhere.



The Varying Agendas of the Challenge
to Derived Demand
The derived-demand framework in transportation has been criticized from a
contradictory set of motivations, one seeming to demote the role of proximity,
                                                WHAT IS TRANSPORTATION FOR?           27


the other seeming to demote the role of mobility in transportation and land-
use planning. Critics questioning the extent to which proximity (or connectiv-
ity) can substitute for mobility are motivated by a desire to understand why
some people seem to resist so strongly land-use policy aimed at reducing their
travel.27 If significant sectors of the population derive enjoyment from travel,
or have an implicit minimum daily travel-time budget which they are seeking
to fill, they will not be motivated to choose travel-reducing locations even if
these are available, these researchers reason.28 But if large numbers of people
derive a positive utility from travel, rather than seeing it as means to an end,
there would be little point in traditional transportation-planning policies such
as roadway capacity expansion, whose purpose, after all, is to reduce the time
and/or distance people need to travel. Some contend that while time spent in
travel may not be a cost for significant numbers of travelers, they do not like
spending their time in congestion and would value roadway capacity expan-
sions.29 Moreover, in this version, without widespread individual motivation to
reduce travel time, there is little point to policies such as job-housing balanc-
ing, which seek to overcome obstacles to reducing commutes, such as exclu-
sionary zoning.30 In both these cases, the primary implications of revising the
travel-as-derived-demand view are to render proximity-based approaches less
relevant to transportation planning.
    By contrast, David Banister draws precisely the opposite conclusion from the
same challenge to the derived nature of travel demand.31 His motivation lies in
the promotion of sustainable urban forms, which he defines largely in proximity
terms. Building on the argument that the demand for travel is not as derived as
previously thought, he concludes that accelerating traffic is unimportant. After
all, if travel demand is not strictly derived, then travel is a benefit in and of itself.
Why focus on speeding up and hence reducing time spent in that beneficial activ-
ity? Instead, the implications of the revised view on derived demand, for him,
are to reduce the need for travel, encourage shifts away from the private car, and
reduce trip lengths.32
    Neither view logically follows from the challenge to the derived-demand
framework. If—contrary to the consensus—most travelers viewed travel time
or distance as a benefit rather than a cost, there would be little basis for either
mobility or proximity in transportation and land-use planning, since both are
approaches to overcoming the spatial separation of origins and destinations. If
that separation were a pure benefit for significant shares of the population, they
would find nothing in need of overcoming. And since the consensus of the field,
including researchers cited here, remains that most travel demand is derived, the
challenge to derived demand would provide scant basis for a wholesale demotion
of either mobility or proximity in any case.33
28        CHAPTER 1


    In sum, the hypothesis that demand for travel is less derived than generally
thought has three strikes against it. First, it remains unsupported empirically. In
contrast to the derived-demand hypothesis, which draws support from decades of
modeling of choices of modes, routes, destinations, and residential locations—and
has long allowed for a minority of travel that was for movement—the challenge
to derived demand has only speculative evidence. Most of the evidence conflates
attributes of destinations, origins, and route-side attractions with a positive util-
ity for time spent in travel. Second, even if the demand for transportation is less
derived than previously thought, the finding would not be particularly conse-
quential or transformative for transportation planning and policy. Since a major-
ity of travel would still be derived from people’s desire to reach destinations, the
derived-demand hypothesis would remain an accurate descriptor for most travel.
Third, while the less-derived-than-thought claim has been used to criticize both
mobility- and proximity-based policies in transportation and land-use planning,
it cannot serve either goal with logical consistency.
    Fundamental policy reform lies not in overturning the derived-demand cor-
nerstone of transportation planning, but in building on it. Neither proximity nor
mobility is an independently supportable outcome measure for transportation
because neither measure, evaluated in isolation, inherently increases people’s
ability to reach their destinations—which is the core purpose of the vast major-
ity of their travel to begin with. Within this accessibility paradigm, increases in
either proximity or mobility are valued as transportation gains only to the extent
that they improve either accessibility overall, accessibility by a particular mode,
or the distribution of accessibility across society.



Accessibility vs. Travel Behavior in
Transportation-Policy Evaluation
Accessibility-based evaluation of transportation and land-use planning is dis-
tinct not only from that based in mobility, but also from that based in travel-
behavior modification—for example, when reductions in vehicle-kilometers
traveled (VKT) are the test of desirable transportation policies. The direct
observability of mobility and travel behavior, together with the clear harms with
which they are associated, congestion and environmental impact, lend each of
them a clarity and urgency as candidate lynchpins of transportation policy
making. But because neither is grounded in the core purpose of transporta-
tion, neither is adequate to the task of capturing—or even approximating—
transportation’s benefits.
                                             WHAT IS TRANSPORTATION FOR?          29


    The travel-behavior orientation implies that the test of transportation and
land-use planning is its capacity to reduce (or reduce the growth in) car use.
A broadly used evaluation approach in this realm seeks to link individuals’ travel
patterns to the characteristics of the built environment.34 Scholars working under
this approach hypothesize that areas that are developed in a fashion that is com-
pact, mixed-use, and safe and amenable for pedestrians, cyclists, and public-
transport users will influence people’s travel behavior toward less driving, with
attendant benefits in the reduction of environmental harms (and other realms
such as health from increased physical activity). If this causal link can be estab-
lished, these scholars reason, then policy makers will have the scientific basis they
need to advance policies promoting compact cities and regions.35 Planning for
compact development would enjoy a legitimacy rooted in the proven mitigation
of environmental and other harms.
    Within this framework, accessibility’s purpose is to improve travel behavior,
and consequently, its test is whether that behavioral modification is achieved.
This is an example of accessibility being assessed according to its instrumental
role. Under the travel-behavior rubric, absent such empirical proof, there would
be little reason to adopt accessibility-promoting policies. This instrumental view
of accessibility emerges explicitly in some transportation and land-use research.
For example, Randal O’Toole writes:

         Some goals, such as accessibility and walkability, are actually inputs, not
         outputs. Just because planners judge a neighborhood to be walkable
         doesn’t mean that anyone is actually walking. One plan defines acces-
         sibility as “the number of opportunities (such as jobs, shopping, etc.)
         that can be reached from a given location within a given amount of
         travel time by auto, transit, or non-motorized modes.” This is an input,
         not an output.36

   Mokhtarian and Salomon similarly endorse the strictly instrumental view of
accessibility:

         The rationale behind accessibility-enhancing policies is that VMT
         [Vehicle Miles Traveled] and consequently energy consumption and
         emissions can be reduced by the expected shift of motorized trips to
         non-motorized modes and to public transportation and by a shift in
         destination to opportunities in greater proximity to residential areas.37

    In other cases, the instrumental view is implicit, as with research structured
to assess the impact of accessibility on driving, public-transport use, or pedes-
trianism. Much research at the nexus of transportation and environmental
30        CHAPTER 1


quality since 1970 has in fact focused on the potential travel-behavior impacts
of various urban forms.38
    The focus on the reduction of VKT as the test of progressive transportation and
land-use planning is easily understood. Automobile use remains a very large con-
tributor to environmental problems from climate change to regional pollution to
local concentrations of air toxics. Notwithstanding technological progress, which
has reduced the car’s environmental impact per kilometer, rapid VKT growth
remains a global threat. Efforts in land-use planning and improvements in public
transport, cycling, and pedestrian infrastructure can contribute—alongside tech-
nological shifts—to the mitigation of environmental harms associated with the
automobile. But in framing the accessibility problem in VKT-reduction terms, the
planning field encounters two problems.
    First, when VKT is the relevant policy test, uncertainty regarding the pres-
ence, magnitude, or statistical significance of VKT-reducing impacts is inevitably
construed as an argument against the planning intervention.39 At the aggregate
scale of the metropolitan region as a whole, VKT is fairly closely related to met-
ropolitan compactness; this relationship weakens when the focus shifts to disag-
gregate studies of individuals and their neighborhoods.40 Weaker effects at the
level of an individual neighborhood are hardly surprising, since travel behavior
depends on the characteristics of the metropolitan area at least as much as local
neighborhood attributes. Large-scale metropolitan-wide transformations hold
great potential for reducing VKT—as evidenced by aggregate studies that com-
pare metropolitan regions with one another—yet any far-reaching transforma-
tion will be the product of the aggregation of small-scale incremental change
over many years.41 Though transportation and land-use reformers aspire to the
more fundamental changes, their desired innovations are often tested at the local,
disaggregate level with attendant controversy about their relevance to transpor-
tation problems, a controversy that can stymie action.
    The second problem is more fundamental, and more harmful for planning.
The VKT generated by a land-use or transportation-system change is a rough
metric of harms, or negative externalities of transportation, but it is quite irrel-
evant to the question of transportation-related benefits. The transportation ben-
efits of such a change would stem from improvements in people’s ability to reach
destinations, that is, accessibility gains. A framework that seeks to reduce harms
is not equivalent to one that seeks to provide (net) benefits, and focusing solely
on the harm side of the equation can lead to perverse outcomes.
    In particular, judging accessibility as a potential tool to reduce VKT, rather
than an inherent benefit, privileges travel that was car-intensive to begin
with; without the presence or threat of intense auto use, there are few vehicle-
kilometers to be reduced. Suppose a planning agency must decide between routing
                                             WHAT IS TRANSPORTATION FOR?         31


a new public-transport line to either a high-income, high-auto-use area or a
low-income, low-auto-use area. Routing the transit line to the low-income area
would have few VKT-reducing effects; even if the line serving the poor area were
heavily used, travelers would tend to be diverted from other public-transport
lines or nonmotorized travel rather than from the automobile. By contrast, an
accessibility analysis would probably find the greatest gains in the poorer area
because low car ownership would likely translate into low accessibility levels for
these residents.
    A focus on VKT reduction as the test of progressive transportation planning
in absence of accessibility evaluation can undermine land-use decision making
as well. For example, consider a planner seeking VKT reductions from a transit-
oriented development strategy. If such a development were targeted to low-income
populations with low baseline car ownership and use, any VKT reductions would
likely be slight. By contrast, transit-oriented development targeted to an affluent,
car-driving population would have a much greater chance of reducing car use
significantly. Yet the accessibility gains would be greatest under the scenario in
which low-income households were afforded the opportunity to live near pub-
lic transport; their low levels of automobility imply greater accessibility benefits
from the ability to walk to high-quality public transport. For these reasons, with-
out knowledge of accessibility impacts, the VKT-reduction criterion, like mobil-
ity enhancement, is inadequate as the central test of transportation and land-use
planning.
    Nevertheless, the relevance of VKT to environmental outcomes implies that
the planner must be centrally concerned about the impacts of decisions and
investments on car use, and ideas pertaining to the role of VKT reduction as a
policy goal, long implicit in academic research, have seen some moves toward
implementation. Beginning in 2013, the State of California initiated a process to
reform methods of transportation evaluation used by public agencies statewide.
Much of the planning process for municipalities and other authorities in Cali-
fornia is governed by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), which
mandates reporting on environmental impacts of public decisions together with
mitigation where feasible. Consistent with decades of transportation-planning
tradition, CEQA had treated degradations of roadway level of service (LOS),
a measure of automotive congestion, as an environmental impact to be mitigated.42
This strictly mobility-based problem definition led to a number of anomalous
situations—for example, when CEQA requirements were used to delay imple-
mentation of a bicycle-improvement plan because of the threat of degraded auto
LOS.43 To reform this situation, the California legislature passed SB743 man-
dating an alternative to LOS for the evaluation of transportation’s environmen-
tal impacts within CEQA.44 According to the law, the alternative metrics could
32        CHAPTER 1


include “vehicle miles traveled, vehicle miles traveled per capita, automobile trip
generation rates, or automobile trips generated.” In the process, VKT was desig-
nated to fundamentally replace LOS as the central indicator of transportation’s
environmental impacts within the CEQA process, requiring significant changes
to the procedures of municipal governments.45
    As a metric of transportation’s environmental impact, VKT is surely superior
to the old LOS metrics, and using it would avoid the problem of penalizing mea-
sures to promote walking, cycling, public-transport use, or denser development
if they threaten to slow the cars. But the overarching framework of CEQA—or
any harm-avoidance approach—is inadequate as a guide to planning because it
overlooks the benefits of transportation. A comprehensive system would need to
incorporate benefits in the form of accessibility increases while weighing them
against harms, which are in part captured by VKT.
    In many circumstances, accessibility-increasing strategies would overlap
with VKT-reducing approaches. This is because the accessibility shift entails the
integration of proximity into transportation and land-use planning. This inte-
gration offers the hope of VKT reductions based on the potential for shorter-
distance travel and modal shifts—a hope that is backed up by empirical evidence
in many cases.46
    Yet accessibility-seeking and VKT-avoiding approaches are not synonymous.
Where the two are congruous, no trade-offs are necessary. This is the case in
cell A of table 1.1, which includes cases where an increased proximity from, for
example, urbanist development, job-housing balancing, or relaxation of low-
density regulations leads to greater origin-destination proximity, and travelers
take advantage of that proximity to reduce their travel. By contrast, low-density,
auto-oriented development (cell D) tends simultaneously to boost VKT and
degrade accessibility, even by car (chapter 4). In both cases A and D, accessibility
and VKT goals are aligned. The noncongruent cases include the issue of roadway
congestion (cell B), which lowers accessibility by reducing travel speeds, but also
constrains trip making and hence VKT. The circumstances that can produce both
greater accessibility and greater VKT (cell C) include policies that seek to increase
the accessibility of low-income households by providing access to affordable cars,
or roadway infrastructure improvements that do not spur extensive low-density,
decentralized development. These policies increase automobile accessibility by
improving mobility while avoiding triggering a degradation of proximity that
would erode or overwhelm these mobility gains.
    Perhaps the most perplexing of the cases of increased accessibility together
with increased VKT is when proximity gains translate into VKT increases
because the reduced cost of travel to the destinations induces more such travel.47
                                                            WHAT IS TRANSPORTATION FOR?                      33


TABLE 1.1 Examples of transportation and land-use outcomes with varying
accessibility and VKT impacts
                                    INCREASE ACCESSIBILITY                          DECREASE ACCESSIBILITY

Decrease VKT               A.                                                  B.
                           Reductions in car use based on                      Congestion that suppresses
                                greater proximity of destinations                   trip making
                                or availability of alternatives                Congestion pricinga
Increase VKT               C.                                                  D.
                           Proximity increases that induce                     Low-density auto-oriented
                                car trips                                           development
                           Cars to low-income households
                           Roadway expansion without high
                                degree of decentralization
a
  Notwithstanding its traffic-accelerating effects, congestion pricing raises the time-plus-money cost of travel
overall in order to reduce roadway volumes. In absence of countervailing land-use impacts (which might arise) it
would therefore be accessibility reducing. Timothy D. Hau, Economic Fundamentals of Road Pricing (Washington,
DC: Infrastructure and Urban Development Department, World Bank, WPS 1070, 1992), 1–27.




This occurs when more nearby destinations are reachable by car, and individu-
als respond with an increased frequency of driving trips. The case of increased
proximity leading to increased travel illustrates well the relationship between
accessibility and VKT-reduction goals. As Bert van Wee shows, increases in prox-
imity that do not translate into travel reductions would nonetheless materialize
as accessibility gains.48 Consider, for example, a case where improved proximity
(e.g., from increased density or land-use mixing) affords people the opportunity
to reduce their travel by choosing more nearby destinations—and yet they do
not. They could have maintained their previous participation in out-of-home
activities while shrinking the time and money they spent in travel. By doing
the opposite, that is, maintaining (or even increasing) their previous levels of
travel, they are demonstrating that their ability to interact with a greater range
of destinations (e.g., to shop at better supermarkets, or work at more challeng-
ing jobs) is more valuable to them than the potential transportation cost savings
that the improved proximity offers. In fact, the accessibility benefits—which are
invisible to a planning model focused solely on VKT reduction—are likely to
exceed benefits that materialize in travel-reduction terms; accessibility is thus
a more robust transportation rationale for reformed land-use planning than
VKT reduction is.49
    The potential for conflict between accessibility and VKT-reduction goals (as
embodied in the noncongruent cells B and C in table 1.1) presents a challenge for
34        CHAPTER 1


accessibility-based transportation and land-use planning. Given the importance
of VKT as an indicator of the environmental harms of transportation—
particularly as these relate to climate change—VKT effects must be a central
concern of the field. But the harms associated with VKT effects are properly con-
sidered in light of accessibility benefits. The nature of the trade-off relationship
would differ according to the values and policy priorities of different decision
makers. Nothing in the accessibility shift predetermines, for example, the proper
weighting of accessibility concerns for low-income households against the threat
of increased VKT, or in general, the relative importance to be accorded to envi-
ronment, equity, and economic development in policy making. Yet the shift does
imply that transportation benefits measured as accessibility are central to deci-
sion making, and that these are not adequately captured by a sole focus on either
mobility improvement or VKT reduction.



Planning and the Derived Nature
of Travel Demand
Mobility, proximity, and VKT reduction have all, at various times, been treated
as transportation and land-use planning’s central goal. Yet none, in isolation, is
capable of gauging the benefits offered by transportation, which are principally
in people’s ability to reach destinations; for that reason, none, used indepen-
dently, can meaningfully guide planners’ efforts to maintain and improve trans-
portation. And judging accessibility by its capacity to further these goals, rather
than as an inherent benefit, neglects the consensus view that the demand for
transportation is largely derived from the demand to reach destinations.
   Viewing movement as a means to an end, the derived-demand view, does
not imply that transportation-cost minimization will, or should, eclipse people’s
other considerations regarding where to live, where to travel, and how to get
there, but simply that the transportation which a choice demands would be one
of the costs in the bundle of attributes that the choice represents. The derived-
demand foundation on which transportation planning has built for the better
part of a century can also support transformations to transportation and land-
use planning practice, particularly when closely coupled with on-the-ground
(and rubber-meets-the-road) decision making.
                                                                          2
EVOLUTION OF THE
ACCESSIBILITY CONCEPT




The idea of accessibility is not new, either to urban and regional planning or to the
social sciences in general. The concept dates back at least to Richard Hurd’s 1903
analysis of urban growth, Robert Haig’s 1926 “ease of contact,” and John Stew-
art’s 1948 “demographic energy.”1 In this chapter, we describe major themes in
the evolution of accessibility over the twentieth century, and argue for a ground-
ing of the accessibility shift both in some of the older traditions of the concept
and in the derived-demand framework described in the previous chapter.
    In Stewart’s analysis, the first of the three to quantify the accessibility concept,
it was a good predictor of outcomes including observed income at the state level.
States with more demographic energy or potential for interaction, such as New
York, had much higher income than states with less, such as North Dakota. In this
original conception, the primary value of the accessibility concept was positive;
here was an independent variable which was useful in descriptive social-science
models of phenomena that varied across space.
    But if accessibility could predict desirable outcomes, perhaps it could also be a
useful indicator for planning. Governments could orient their activities in trans-
portation investment or land-use regulation toward increasing the average level
of this apparently valuable resource, or perhaps distributing it more equitably.
This would be a normative or prescriptive use of the concept; accessibility could
be a societal indicator which public planning consciously strives to improve.
Stewart recognized the idea’s normative potential and concluded his seminal


                                                                           35
36        CHAPTER 2


article with a string of rhetorical questions: “If the maximization of demographic
energy or mass is set as a proper social goal, then what part must the freedom
of the individual play? Can the sum of human relations represented by (N1µ1)
(N2µ2)/d [Stewart’s accessibility metric] be increased if instead of being permit-
ted to occur spontaneously between pairs of persons the relations are required to
be channeled through a chain of social command? Can an individual by taking
thought add a unit to his demographic stature? Can society do this for him?”
Stewart’s answer to these philosophical questions was a final rhetorical flourish
appealing to higher authority: “Were the prophets right in insisting that every
increase comes as a gift of spiritual grace from a Power above mankind?”2
    In other words, Stewart recognized the potential of accessibility as a norma-
tive goal early on: if energy or accessibility can predict important outcomes such
as income, then surely it could also be seen as a policy variable to be directly
manipulated by central planners. The reference to the divine might not be pub-
lishable in contemporary scientific journals, but it had the virtue of explicitness
regarding its normative position: yes, promotion or redistribution of accessibility
could be seen as a normative goal, but that would be an unacceptable tampering
with the natural order. Accessibility was too valuable to be conferred according
to conscious thought or analysis; it had to be accepted as emerging from a source
beyond rational human influence. As guidance for policy, accessibility threatened
too much governmental coordination. It smacked of a policy agenda extending
beyond accepted small-government tasks of establishment of property rights and
mitigation of harms to a search for societal benefits. It was simply too hot to
handle.
    After Stewart’s meditation on—and warning against—the potential of
accessibility as a prescriptive goal for public policy, accessibility’s normative
side remained dormant for decades, even as the concept flourished as a positive
variable used for prediction and description. Echoing earlier authors, Walter
Hansen applied the term “accessibility” to Stewart’s “demographic energy” and
broadly introduced the concept into the urban and regional realm with three
ideas central to the planning use of the tool.3 First, like Hurd’s and Haig’s anal-
yses early in the century—and unlike Stewart’s nationally scaled research—
Hansen’s analysis was metropolitan, not the continental. Second, the outcome
variable for Hansen was residential development, a central concern of the
urban-planning profession. And finally, where Stewart had implicitly treated
peoples’ inclination to travel as a constant value, Hansen showed that it was
a variable subject to empirical investigation. This empiricism allowed Han-
sen to discover, for instance, that once destination locations and travel speeds
were controlled for, people exhibited a willingness to travel greater distances
for work than for nonwork purposes.
                                   EVOLUTION OF THE ACCESSIBILITY CONCEPT         37


Positive vs. Normative Accessibility
The strictly positive and predictive nature of Hansen’s accessibility analysis was
clear from the description of his purposes and thus remained consistent with
Stewart’s ideas regarding the proper use of the concept. He argued that areas
of greater accessibility have greater growth potential, a principle that could be
harnessed to develop predictive models of land use.4 Throughout the 1960s,
a growing number of studies built on the accessibility concept for analytical and
predictive purposes. These included choice models of residential location (some-
times combined with transportation-mode choice), predictions of traffic flows,
and refinements of the accessibility concept itself and its measurement.5 With
data improvements and the advent of advanced tools for spatial analysis, the
analytical and predictive uses of the accessibility concept accelerated rapidly in
the 1990s.6
   In the meantime, another use of the concept had become explicit: accessibility
promotion as a normative goal, social indicator, or potential metric for the evalu-
ation of plans. In fact, this idea had been present all along. For example, Haig had
offered a futuristic vision of the prescriptive use of accessibility in 1926:

         When the city planner of the future is asked whether a button fac-
         tory belongs on Fifth Avenue, it may be possible to reply somewhat as
         follows: “This activity consists of 70 per cent fabrication, 15 percent
         storage, 10 per cent price establishment, and 5 per cent miscellaneous
         functions, giving it a rating of 2.7 points. Land on Fifth Avenue of this
         degree of accessibility may not be utilized economically by any activity
         with a rating of less than 9.3. . . . The button factory should locate, say,
         in Rahway, New Jersey, or in Stamford, Connecticut.” The formula of
         the future . . . will show what activities can and cannot pay downtown
         rents. It will supply a scientific basis for zoning.7

   While Haig offered the scenario in all earnestness, he understood that it was
not within scientific reach and ultimately fell back on an externality, rather than
accessibility, rationale for land-use regulation: “Unless zoning is fully and skill-
fully applied, it is entirely possible for an individual to make for himself a dollar
of profit, but at the same time to cause a loss of many dollars to his neighbors and
to the community as a whole, so that the social result is a net loss.”8
   A more feasible proposal for a normative application of accessibility, five
decades later, considered the problem that the evaluation of plans typically
occurred through aggregate measures, such as total system travel costs or benefit-
cost ratios, which obscured plans’ distributional impacts.9 The proposed antidote
to this global level of analysis was a sector-by-sector evaluation of accessibility;
38        CHAPTER 2


for example, one might model the impact of a plan on the accessibility of low-
income workers to employment appropriate to them.
   The first reference to accessibility as a normative indicator of transportation-
system performance in explicit juxtaposition with mobility is found in an arti-
cle by Wachs and Kumagai from 1973. Movement, according to them, was not
a meaningful measure of policy goals in isolation; more movement could lead to
less time and money for other goods or services. Here, they explain the deficiency
of mobility-based measures:

         Because the component of expenditure or consumption which is allo-
         cated to travel or transportation is not available to purchase the ser-
         vice itself, large travel expenses might result in poorer services rendered
         or fewer goods consumed. If we study only total expenditure data for
         particular services we might attribute higher service levels to consum-
         ers who spend more money on the service. In fact, large expenditures
         might result in higher service levels for some, and might be dissipated
         on transport costs for others. The use of such input information as
         social indicators may thus be quite misleading.10

   In distinguishing the resources devoted to transportation from those devoted
to a directly demanded service, Wachs and Kumagai articulated a derived-
demand rationale for accessibility-based transportation planning. This perspec-
tive was echoed several years later by Jennifer Morris, Peter Dumble, and Marcus
Wigan with a rejection of mobility (“connectivity” in that paper) measures in
favor of their accessibility counterparts for guidance of transportation decisions:

         There may yet be a place for measures of connectivity of the transport
         network or measures of accessibility to public transport—such mea-
         sures may be useful in pinpointing glaring deficiencies in the transport
         system. But for most of the broader issues tackled in present-day trans-
         port planning these measures must be rejected on behavioural grounds.
         Indicators of travel time, distance or cost fail unless supplemented
         because they reflect only one of the components of the satisfaction an
         individual may derive from his travel. Account should also be taken of
         the probable interest of the destination reached.11

    That study rejected both general mobility metrics and measures of accessibil-
ity to public transport (as opposed to destinations) as broad system-wide indi-
cators because they treated movement as the relevant service, rather than access
to destinations. Thus, by the 1970s, researchers had identified the inconsistency
of mobility-based planning: it was a mismatch with the fundamental purpose of
transportation.
                                   EVOLUTION OF THE ACCESSIBILITY CONCEPT        39


    The normative view of accessibility was aligned with an evolving understand-
ing in transportation circles that land use was not inherently an external force to
which transportation policy responded but the potential object of policy atten-
tion in its own right. This evolution was seen in the observation that accessibility
planning can improve provision of goods and services through organization of
activities in time or location, not just increases in transportation capacity.
    Thus, the idea that Stewart rejected in 1948 as a violation of the heavenly
order—policy reform directed at enhancing accessibility—was advocated
explicitly twenty-five years later, at least on the pages of research journals. Yet,
with only a few exceptions, mobility metrics including level of service, travel
speeds, and value of time lost in congestion remained the core indicators for
transportation policy in the United States and many countries around the
world.12 And the primary professional and research application of the accessibil-
ity concept was in its positive or predictive incarnation.



Accessibility Defined as Urbanism
Early work viewing accessibility as a normative goal for planning hewed closely
to Hansen’s definition of the concept, using indicators such as the number or
density of destinations by type that various population groups could reach for
a given investment of time or money.13 The approaches to accessibility that
emerged from the positive-measurement tradition inherently incorporated the
movement of all modes—even long-distance auto travel—as being captured by
the accessibility concept. When articulated in this fashion, there was no need to
specify—in fact, no logic in specifying—a separate mobility goal, since acces-
sibility incorporated mobility by definition.
    But this particular view of accessibility seemed to wane after initial explora-
tions in the 1970s. It may have been supplanted by the ascendant school within
transportation and land-use studies: empirical testing of the link between land-
use patterns and travel behavior. By the time the normative view of accessibil-
ity reemerged in the 1990s, it had largely acquired a new meaning. The earlier
normative perspective had sought to apply metrics incorporating proximity and
mobility, the classical definition of accessibility, to the assessment of planning
outcomes without presupposing which urban forms would promote accessibil-
ity. By contrast, the newer view equated accessibility promotion inherently with
urbanist policy prescriptions, such as mixed-use development with a pedestrian,
cycling, or transit orientation. The broad concept of accessibility as established
by Hansen waned in favor of the urbanist-based focus on local or neighborhood
accessibility, or even proximity. For example, Jeffrey Tumlin sharply demotes
40        CHAPTER 2


mobility in the accessibility tool kit, leaving only proximity and connectivity as
fully legitimate accessibility tools, and ending up with a focus on local destina-
tions to the exclusion of regional ones: “Rather than focusing on movement,
accessibility may bring the product closer to the consumer. Locating a school
and a retail main street in the middle of a neighborhood improves accessibil-
ity, reducing the need for people to move long distances and improving their
choices. Accessibility investments include mixed-use zoning, delivery services,
and high-speed internet services that reduce the need for movement.”14
    There are three problems with a focus on neighborhood-scaled proximity
to the exclusion of movement along networks. First, congestion of pedestrian,
cycling, and public-transport facilities is common in very large cities interna-
tionally. This congestion would impede accessibility to local destinations by
these modes, but it is not typically accounted for by proximity measures alone.
Second, not all local trips are by foot, bike, or transit; auto movements are also
relevant to local accessibility, yet proximity without speeds would not incor-
porate the potential for denser environments to slow auto travel. Third, even
the best mixed-use neighborhoods capture only a fraction of nonwork travel.15
This means that their local accessibility is only a partial indicator of their over-
all accessibility.
    Local accessibility features prominently in many urbanist accessibility defi-
nitions. Within this framework, while “automobility” planning strategies have
included road construction, intelligent transportation systems, transportation
system management, and large-scale public and private transport, “accessibil-
ity” approaches include land-use management, telecommunication advances,
transportation-demand management, and community-scale public and non-
motorized transport. In general, Robert Cervero argues that “automobility plan-
ning works on the supply side, aiming to increase the speed and ease of moving
about the spread-out city. Accessibility planning, on the other hand, emphasizes
demand management. . . . It seeks to manage physical space and resources to avoid
or minimize motorized travel.”16
    Susan Handy writes about accessibility solutions similarly, denoting options
such as road building and intelligent highway system applications as mobility-
oriented strategies.17 These stand in contrast to the accessibility-based approaches
including New Urbanism, transit-oriented development, infill development,
Main Street programs, and street connectivity.
    Defining accessibility in urbanist terms entangles the concept in logical conun-
drums. This problem can be seen, for example, when large-scale public transport
is counted on the mobility side of the ledger, and community-scale public and
nonmotorized transport are equated to accessibility.18 The division is arbitrary,
because all urban transportation modes, from walking to cycling to expressway
                                    EVOLUTION OF THE ACCESSIBILITY CONCEPT          41


driving, allow the traveler to move and are hence means of mobility. Over
the long run, some mobility improvements would be accessibility enhancing;
others—because of their capacity to induce a spread of origins and destinations—
would be accessibility degrading. But this is a question for empirical observation
and modeling, not definition. Identification of a set of built-environment poli-
cies that equate to accessibility blurs the fundamental understanding implicit in
the classical definition of the concept: rather than a commitment to a particular
urban form, accessibility is the ability to reach destinations.
    Moreover, if one relies on the classical definition, the very idea of a distinc-
tion between mobility and accessibility strategies breaks down. Because mobil-
ity is one means to the end of accessibility, the “mobility-versus-accessibility”
dichotomy in categorizing built-environment policies and investments makes
no more sense than a “proximity-versus-accessibility” trade-off would. To illus-
trate, consider investments in sidewalks, bike lanes, or urban public-transport
lines, which, notwithstanding their identification with an urbanist policy agenda,
are surely mobility improvements. In all likelihood, they would enhance acces-
sibility as well, as long as they do not induce extensive spreading of origins and
destinations.
    The classical definition of accessibility allows greater proximity to be relevant
to accessibility even if it does not bring destinations within walking, cycling, or
public-transport range. For example, an employment concentration that can
be reached only by car but is twenty kilometers away is more accessible than
a similar center at forty kilometers’ distance. While this kind of improved acces-
sibility might not register on the urbanist’s radar screen, it expands accessibility’s
geographic relevance from zones of walkable urbanism to every corner of the
metropolitan region. And by extending accessibility’s scope to the automobile,
these definitions render the accessibility shift relevant to planning for all trans-
portation modes.
    The definitional question is much more than semantic. Beginning in the 1990s,
the accessibility paradigm became the language of many advocates of an urbanist
planning agenda. While there is surely significant overlap between accessibility
and urbanism, failure to keep these concepts distinct ultimately empties the acces-
sibility shift of its analytical content. While many of the urbanists’ prescriptions
will be accessibility enhancing, a potentially much larger share of accessibility-
enhancing policies will not be particularly relevant to urbanism. Moreover, some
policies oriented toward smoothing the flow of vehicles, which may include
transit, taxis, and other forms of shared mobility, may increase accessibility.
As long as accessibility is seen as equivalent to a particular set of built-environment
prescriptions, it will have little power to transform transportation and land-use
planning. Instead, it will be vulnerable to the charge that it is the domain of
42         CHAPTER 2


a limited market comprised of people with urbanist preferences (and pocket-
books to match), rather than the fundamental purpose of transportation.
    Defining accessibility as urbanism seems to lead naturally to a pairing of
accessibility and mobility as the twin goals of transportation policy. Even advo-
cates of the shift to accessibility planning pair the two goals in defining the proper
operations of transportation planning. For example, Cervero, after urging a shift
to accessibility planning, writes: “Of course, all of this is not to suggest that we
abandon mobility-based planning. Cars are here to stay, and there remains a need
to ensure their safe and efficient passage, albeit in a sustainable and environmen-
tally benign way and in deference to neighborhoods and places. What is called for
is more even-handedness. . . . Infusing long-range transportation planning with
an accessibility-based mind set provides this.”19 Tumlin, who often equates acces-
sibility and proximity, states similarly that “all transportation systems should
invest in both mobility and accessibility, balancing the two.”20
    The pairing of the two goals often occurs with little evidence of the dis-
tinction between the two.21 For example, the 2030 regional plan for the Detroit
metropolitan area names as “Goal 1” the objective to “enhance accessibility
and mobility for all people” without explaining the distinction between the
concepts.22 CalTrans takes a stab at distinguishing the two but leaves readers
scratching their heads as to the distinction: “Mobility refers to the ease or dif-
ficulty of traveling from an origin to a destination.”23 “Accessibility is defined as
the opportunity and ease of reaching desired destinations.”24 Does the distinc-
tion lie in the difference between “traveling to” and “reaching” destinations? Or
perhaps it lies in the presence of the word “origin” in the definition of mobility?
    Most commonly, however, accessibility and mobility are paired with no
attempt at defining or distinguishing them.25 In U.S. transportation planning,
much of this derives from a vague federal mandate: the United States Code
specifies that “the metropolitan planning process for a metropolitan planning
area under this section shall provide for consideration of projects and strategies
that will . . . increase the accessibility and mobility of people and for freight.”26
The relevant sections offer no assistance to the transportation planner seeking
to understand and distinguish the concepts, and many metropolitan planning
organizations adopt the federally specified accessibility-mobility pairing without
meaningful interpretation of the concepts.
    The flawed parallelism of the accessibility-and-mobility goal formulation is
an unintended by-product of an urbanist definition of accessibility. With accessi-
bility defined in terms of walkability, density, mixed-use development, and pub-
lic transport, some automobile-relevant transportation-planning goal must be
specified. The mobility goal in the accessibility-plus-mobility pairing seems to be
a placeholder for the sentiment that walkability is good, but people still need cars,
                                   EVOLUTION OF THE ACCESSIBILITY CONCEPT         43


and the cars still have to be able to move. This formulation calling for a balance
between mobility and accessibility represents some progress in transportation
planning by acknowledging the inadequacy of a sole focus on mobility, but it
remains a vague and inconsistent formulation. By treating both terms as goals,
this specification fails to acknowledge the asymmetry of the ends-means rela-
tionship between them. Moreover, by pairing ends (accessibility) with one means
(mobility), the formulation neglects the alternative and sometimes competing
means of connectivity and (most notably) proximity.
    The consequence of the ungainly mobility-and-accessibility pairing is to
limit the transformative power of the accessibility concept. Once mobility enters
transportation planning as a parallel goal, metrics of travel speed are seen as
meaningfully analyzed in isolation from people’s destinations and from the time-
and-money cost required to reach them. The superfluousness of the mobility-
and-accessibility pairing can be seen as follows: a mobility policy that furthers
accessibility would already be covered by the accessibility goal specification.
And a mobility policy that degrades accessibility would lower the service people
receive from the transportation system. In either case, there is no consistent ratio-
nale for an independent mobility goal.
    Notwithstanding the argument against accessibility as urbanism by definition,
the accessibility shift is highly relevant to an urbanist policy agenda. Mobility-
based planning constitutes a barrier to compact, mixed-use, walkable, and transit-
friendly development in numerous ways. Land-use regulation that is geared to
maintaining highway level-of-service standards tends to limit development in
already built-up areas because of the threat of congestion. Transportation invest-
ment geared to vehicular movement frequently has the by-product of spurring
low-density, auto-oriented areas and limiting walkable urbanist development. In
general, proximity, surely one of the keys to successful urbanism, is invisible or
worse to mobility-oriented transportation methods. The methods do not con-
stitute an absolute bar to urbanist development, but rather constitute barriers to
be overcome. A shift to accessibility-based planning can facilitate urbanist policy
options by reducing those barriers.



Evaluative Framework vs. Market
Basket of Policies
Though it makes little sense to refer to mobility-versus-accessibility approaches
when discussing specific plans, policies, or investments, one can readily evaluate
plans or outcomes through alternative lenses of mobility or accessibility. Cen-
tral to the accessibility shift is not a checklist of urban-development policies or
44         CHAPTER 2


investments but a logically consistent definition of what counts as transporta-
tion success and the alignment of analytical techniques and metrics with this
definition. When “accessibility” is used as shorthand for “urbanism,” its power
is undermined. But when it is viewed as the proper framework for land-use and
transportation evaluation, its effects could be far-reaching.
    This is because evaluation frameworks in transportation and land use are
used not only for scorekeeping, but are central to proactive policy guidance. For
example, under the common mobility-based practice of traffic-impact analysis,
the municipality sets a highway level-of-service standard for its roadways, which
serves as a general higher-end threshold for acceptable congestion. The munici-
pality then seeks to regulate new development to attempt to ensure that traffic
is not degraded below this standard. A forecast of development-generated traffic
worse than the standard would generally trigger requirements for traffic signal
improvements, or intersection or roadway widenings. Where these are insuffi-
cient to handle the additional traffic load, the municipality may require density
reductions in the proposed development. As development and traffic grow, the
extent of mitigation needed to maintain automotive traffic flow at the estab-
lished standard would increase rapidly, and costs could render the development
project infeasible. In this way, the practice of traffic-impact analysis, operating as
a future-oriented mobility-based standard, can become a binding constraint on
the extent of development that can occur in an area. Where this happens, prox-
imity is degraded in attempts to safeguard mobility by automobile.
    At times, localities will drop their level-of-service standards in order to allow
for denser development, a procedure that illustrates the obstacle that traditional
mobility approaches pose to urbanism. Lowering one’s standards is rarely seen as
a good thing, and politicians who propose such a move are likely to be the target
of their constituents’ ire. Accessibility-based planning seeks to alter the game by
changing the scorecard. Dense development in a built-up area would likely have
positive impacts on proximity and negative effects on mobility; the accessibility
impacts arise from the combination of the two. The municipality considering
denser development would not need to lower its standards in order to approve
the proposal; rather, it would evaluate development offering significant accessi-
bility improvements as benefiting, rather than degrading, transportation.



Other Accessibility-Mobility Pairings
Accessibility is sometimes seen as a broadening of the concept of mobility.
According to this thinking, traditionally defined mobility—as gauged by highway
level of service, for example—is too narrow. But since within this view mobility
                                   EVOLUTION OF THE ACCESSIBILITY CONCEPT          45


is the purpose of transportation, the concept of mobility, rather than serving as
a means to accessibility, needs to be expanded to incorporate accessibility. For
example, a workshop on transportation indicators sponsored by the National
Research Council concluded that “a measure of mobility must include elements
of accessibility. . . . An example of this type of measure is to record the percentage
of travel opportunities within 20 minutes as a measure of what the transporta-
tion system offers.”27
    Incorporating accessibility metrics within the suite of mobility indicators
represents a broadening of transportation’s goals and a partial recognition that
movement is not always desired for its own sake. But ultimately, this redefini-
tion of mobility as incorporating accessibility is equivalent to the twinning of
accessibility and mobility. It places accessibility in the mix, but keeps simple
mobility (as manifest, for example, in highway level of service) as an indepen-
dent goal, which is inconsistent with the derived view of transportation demand.
By subordinating accessibility to mobility, it fails to acknowledge either the end-
means relationship between the two or the presence of two alternative means for
promoting accessibility.
    A related misconception imagines a one-to-one correspondence between
accessibility and mobility, that is, mobility is the means to accessibility (rather
than one of three). This neglects the roles of both proximity and connectivity in
generating accessibility. Physical accessibility is always a function of the interac-
tion of mobility and proximity, and never mobility in isolation. For example, the
view that mobility is best understood as the unit price of accessibility is accurate
in the sense that mobility is an input to accessibility, and it has a cost.28 But
describing the relationship in this fashion is akin to referring to fertilizer as the
unit price of crops; fertilizer is one costly input, but only one among several.
There are alternative mixes of inputs that can increase the final good or ser-
vice, and increasing the intermediate input does not always increase the final
product. The accessibility shift is meaningful to the extent that it conceptually
separates accessibility from mobility; by contrast, understandings that imply that
mobility is the sole means to accessibility, or incorporate accessibility into the
mobility concept, retain a tight coupling between the two.



Tampering with the Natural Order?
Some obstacles to the accessibility shift are lessened through a more appropri-
ate and precise articulation of the accessibility concept itself. Others may be
more stubborn. The implication referred to at the beginning of this chapter, that
conscious planning around accessibility somehow amounts to tampering with
46        CHAPTER 2


a celestial order, hints at an important political impediment to the shift. Using
accessibility to guide transportation investments and land-use regulations is, to
some, an overly intrusive idea. Since accessibility inherently incorporates issues
of land use and injects regional-level considerations into what otherwise might
be local decision making, the shift may be seen as impinging on municipal regu-
latory prerogative, something that is zealously guarded in a number of countries,
particularly the United States. And since accessibility planning inherently inte-
grates the disparate realms of transportation and land use, it will appear to some
as threatening excessive governmental coordination in a fashion that is antago-
nistic to individual liberty.
   Yet both land-use policy—whether in the form of conventional zoning or
more innovative instruments of growth management—and transportation infra-
structure investments have the by-product of creating, constraining, or redistrib-
uting accessibility. No approach to transportation and land-use planning is free
of accessibility implications. Few observers of the very earthly planning process
would trace the genesis of day-to-day decisions in land use or transportation to
a Power above mankind; both the existing distribution of accessibility and its
change over time are shaped by planned decisions by human beings, frequently
operating within a governmental structure. An accessibility perspective on trans-
portation and land-use planning merely seeks to make the values tied to these
decisions an explicit subject of the public discourse: Do planning actions increase
or degrade accessibility? Do they advantage accessibility by some modes versus
others? Do they render its distribution more or less equitable? Neglecting these
questions in favor of the traditional metrics of mobility may succeed in avoid-
ing the appearance of planning intervention into society. But closer examination
reveals this impression’s illusory nature. Accessibility is unavoidably shaped by
policy because land use and transportation are inherently realms of pervasive
governmental action. Acknowledgment of this reality demands abandoning the
myth that accessibility outcomes emerge from a source beyond human decision
making in favor of a conscious linking of the human-made order of the built
environment with the human goal of access to destinations.
                                                                       3
ACCESSIBILITY IN EVERYDAY
PLANNING




Consider the conundrum of accessibility-savvy planners in a municipal context.
They understand that improving accessibility is the core purpose of transporta-
tion and are persuaded that, when viewed as a planning goal, accessibility helps
integrate transportation and land-use systems. They seek to use accessibility
as a guide for their decision making, but they lack the tools to do it, since the
guidebooks and standards that they were trained to follow are almost completely
geared toward mobility. For example, the review of a new residential tower on a
vacant lot downtown requires a recommendation on whether to approve, deny,
or modify the proposal. The city’s conventional way of assessing the transporta-
tion impacts of new developments is mobility based, using traffic-impact analy-
sis to evaluate the proposed high rise. Downtown streets are already packed,
and adding a new residential tower threatens to exacerbate congestion. Yet the
project may be an accessibility winner: allowing more people to choose a down-
town location as a place to live might offer more in the way of greater proximity
than it detracts via degraded mobility. Conventional mobility tools may steer
the decision toward shrinking the proposed development to mitigate predicted
congestion, without ever considering its potential accessibility gains.
    To make matters worse, currently available accessibility metrics seem ill
adapted to the problems these planners face, because the existing tools provide
an accessibility snapshot for an entire metropolitan region, rather than a gauge
of the incremental effect of an individual project. Yet individual projects, whether
transportation or land-use based, form the context of most applied planning

                                                                        47
48         CHAPTER 3


decisions. To advocate for an accessibility perspective in decisions like these,
planners need tools that shift from mobility-based to accessibility-based analysis
and work at the project scale as well.
   In this chapter, we develop methods to support accessibility-based analysis
for both land-development and transportation projects to help forge a closer
link between accessibility analysis and applied decision making in planning. The
chapter begins with a brief survey of methods for accessibility measurement and
then demonstrates empirical application at the project level using data from real-
world land-development projects in Ann Arbor, Michigan, and a suite of trans-
portation projects in San Antonio, Texas.



Measuring and Representing Accessibility
Accessibility metrics vary in their measurement approach, purposes, and levels of
complexity.1 This section summarizes the foundational concepts of accessibility
measurement and representation. Accessibility is normally reported in the form
of a score or index to describe the ease of reaching destinations from a place,
which allows analysts to compare accessibility from one place to another, or
track changes in accessibility over time. Sometimes an accessibility score conveys
a directly interpretable meaning, as with the statement “1,000 jobs are within
15 minutes of travel by car from Zone A.” Sometimes an accessibility score is
designed to be a dimensionless index, so that the index only has a relative mean-
ing for comparison between areas. Analysts face several choices when measuring
accessibility, but most approaches include a common set of elements.


Origins
The accessibility scores used in this book are attributes of places, so specific place
locations must be defined to establish an accessibility measure. An origin is typi-
cally defined as a zone, such as a traffic-analysis zone, census tract, neighbor-
hood, or block. But the place can also be a point in space, such as a home or a
particular building’s address. Analysts often use attributes of the origin, such as
the number or characteristics of people living there, to link place-based acces-
sibility to particular types of people.


Destinations
The places that travelers seek to reach also require definition. Because of the
importance of employment, jobs are a common destination type in accessibility
                                       ACCESSIBILITY IN EVERYDAY PLANNING         49


analysis. Destinations can be disaggregated into categories, as when an analysis
divides jobs into various categories based on wage levels, and then calculates
separate accessibility scores for each wage level.2 Nonwork destinations involve
a range of activities, such as shopping for groceries, studying at school, or con-
sulting about health care at a medical center. An analysis might combine vari-
ous destination types into a single, composite metric of nonwork accessibility,
as discussed in chapter 7. Other nonwork analyses calculate separate accessibility
scores by sector, such as one for grocery stores and another for schools.3 Weight-
ing destinations by their relative attractiveness is important. Weights can be con-
structed on dimensions such as building size, product or service affordability,
trips generated, or service quality. Like origins, the identification of destinations
is typically in the form of a structure of zones but can also be individual points
in space.


Travel Cost (or Impedance)
Accessibility scores account for the cost of travel from origin to destination. The
most common approach is to use travel time, and that is the approach used in
this book, but other costs can also be used, including distance and/or monetary
expenditures. Sometimes generalized cost, a combination of time and money
costs, is used as the indicator of impedance.


Impedance Function
While the cost of moving from origin to destination is directly measurable, its
meaning varies across travelers. Some would consider a thirty-minute nonwork
trip to be short, while others would see it as quite long and would behave accord-
ingly when choosing how and where to travel. Analysts use an impedance func-
tion to capture the increasing difficulty of interaction as travel costs increase.4
The relationship between travel costs and perceived difficulty of interaction var-
ies by trip purpose. For example, travelers feel a greater “friction,” or resistance
to longer distances, when setting out to buy groceries than they do when going to
work. This phenomenon is captured via differing formulations of the impedance
function or values of the parameters it uses.


Mode and Times of Day
Because travel costs depend on the mode of travel (e.g., a bus typically requires
substantially more time than a car to travel the same distance) and also on the
time of day (e.g., morning and afternoon peak periods require more travel
50        CHAPTER 3


time), accessibility scores are typically calculated separately for each mode, and
sometimes for different periods of the day (e.g., peak and off-peak periods).
Modes also are influenced differentially by travel distance, which is reflected
in differing modal impedance functions; for example, the difference between
one and two kilometers is hardly relevant while driving, but the impedance
experienced between those two distances would be substantially different for
a pedestrian.



Approaches to Measuring Accessibility
Accessibility metrics differ in their handling of these elements, especially in
the treatment of impedance. The simplest technique is the cumulative-oppor-
tunities approach, a straightforward count of the number of destinations that
can be reached within a given travel time or cost. To illustrate, if zone A has
10 restaurants within a 20-minute drive time, and zone B has only 5 restau-
rants within a 20-minute drive, zone A has twice the restaurant accessibility
by car of B.5 This approach has the advantage of providing an accessibility
score that is easy to understand. The main weaknesses are that all destinations
within the fixed threshold are weighted equally even though distant destina-
tions are less desirable, and all destinations beyond the selected threshold are
ignored.
    Gravity measures of accessibility overcome these weaknesses of the cumulative-
opportunities measure by weighting close opportunities more heavily than those
farther away.6 But this improvement in measurement comes at the cost of losing
the score’s intuitive meaning, since gravity models produce an accessibility score
in the form of a dimensionless index.
    Utility measures of accessibility offer a third approach to handling travel
costs and impedance. Utility-based calculations of accessibility are based on
discrete-choice models of destination choice and are a gauge of the expected
utility provided by a choice of available destinations and modes.7 Such util-
ity-based measures of access to opportunity are able to account for how dif-
ferent individuals value elements of their journey differentially. For example,
some travelers might prefer low-cost but more time-consuming trips while
others might value faster trips even if they are more expensive. By capturing
such differences, utility metrics excel at estimating accessibility at the level of
the individual, an important advance considering the many person-specific
characteristics that determine people’s ability to interact with their environ-
ment. However, utility-based accessibility calculations are considerably more
                                       ACCESSIBILITY IN EVERYDAY PLANNING         51


complex to calibrate and interpret, a factor that limits their applicability in
applied planning practice.
   In this book we employ gravity metrics in most instances, but with no claim
to their inherent superiority. In general, accessibility metrics are employed for
purposes that vary between contexts; this implies that no metric is superior in all
instances. In particular, transportation and land-use planning’s future orienta-
tion tends to limit the applicability of complex utility-based accessibility metrics.
This is in part because the identity, preferences, and travel constraints of future
residents are usually unknown. For this reason, the cumulative opportunity
or gravity methods may be more applicable to many future-oriented planning
decisions.



Representation of Accessibility Metrics
Accessibility metrics may be represented as a map showing accessibility values
across zones, a chart displaying accessibility’s distribution across a population, or
a summary score that aggregates multiple accessibility scores into a single value
for an entire city or region. Also of interest may be the change in accessibility
across time or space, as when an analysis compares across time periods or alter-
native development scenarios.
    When metropolitan job accessibility is displayed in map form, most met-
ropolitan areas illustrate a centralized accessibility pattern, with accessibility
highest in the central business district and declining slowly outward in all
directions. This finding holds despite large-scale job decentralization in the
United States, or the location of employment in many subcenters and the areas
between them. Even in regions where the central business district of the largest
city holds only a small share of regional jobs, it generally remains the acces-
sibility high point.
    There may be pockets of concentrated access located in regional subcenters,
but these subcenters tend to have relatively poor access to the other subcenters,
whereas the central business district has reasonably good access to nearly every-
where in the region. The decentralized Los Angeles region exemplifies these phe-
nomena, with the highest employment accessibility by car observed in the central
city, and decreasing accessibility bands headed to the suburban regions of Los
Angeles County and its neighbors (figure 3.1).
    Public-transport accessibility is more geographically irregular than its auto
counterpart, because transit accessibility tends to be concentrated around station
areas, and so sometimes displays low points in areas between stations.
52        CHAPTER 3




FIGURE 3.1. Distribution of transit accessibility for metropolitan Los
Angeles, 2012


    The disadvantage of the map format is that is does not tell the story of how
accessibility is experienced by residents; for example, a large area of high acces-
sibility may have sparse population and hence affect people’s ability to reach
destinations only slightly. A chart can overcome this drawback by showing how
accessibility is distributed across the entire population, as well as how it is expe-
rienced by a particular population segment.8 For example, transit accessibil-
ity varies markedly across the Los Angeles region, with virtually none for the
20 percent of residents experiencing the lowest accessibility (figure 3.2). The
90th-percentile resident enjoys about 30 percent of the transit accessibility of
those who live in the center of the region and experience the maximum transit
accessibility the region has to offer.
    At the level of the region or city, the population’s average accessibility can
be calculated as a single number for purposes of intermetropolitan compari-
son or benchmarking performance over time.9 This is typically accomplished
by taking a population-weighted average across a set of zones. This can allow
an analyst to conclude, for example, that San Francisco has a higher average
public-transport accessibility than Washington, DC, or that accessibility to jobs
by bicycle has improved 12 percent from 2005 to 2015. The quantification of
accessibility at the aggregate scale hides a great deal of specific demographic and
geographic variation but can be useful in comparisons of regionwide accessibil-
ity performance.
                                                                  ACCESSIBILITY IN EVERYDAY PLANNING      53



                               100

                                             10th percentile                           90th percentile

                               80




Accessibility (scaled 0–100)
                               60




                               40




                               20




                               0

                                     0           20              40            60             80         100
                                                               Population percentile

  FIGURE 3.2.                            Transit accessibility to jobs by census tract for Los Angeles
  metro, 2012


  Accessibility Evaluation in Regional
  Scenario Planning
  This regional scale was the first place accessibility made its mark in applied plan-
  ning practice through scenario-planning efforts, which lend themselves read-
  ily to accessibility measurement. Regional scenario planning is a natural venue
  for the application of accessibility metrics because scenarios consider complete
  and well-defined potential land-use and transportation futures. In this context,
  accessibility metrics are a succinct way to evaluate how well the transportation
  and land-use systems work in combination to facilitate people’s ability to reach
  desired destinations.
      Regional scenario plans are based on hypothetical futures for metropoli-
  tan areas.10 Several possible futures are sketched out, including varying land-
  use patterns and alternative future regimes of transportation infrastructure.
  These futures scenarios are typically organized thematically, often with one
54        CHAPTER 3


representing “business as usual” and others representing potential counter-
points to current development patterns, such as increased development in cen-
ters or along major public transport corridors. The scenarios may project a state
twenty or more years into the future. A variety of performance measures are
then applied to compare this small set (typically about three to five) of future
scenarios. Performance measures may address a range of issues including eco-
nomic development, affordable-housing supply, environmental quality, and the
functioning of the future transportation system. With respect to transporta-
tion performance measures, such scenario plans typically consider mobility in
terms of the level of congestion in the regional roadway system and/or delays
in regional travel times. In a few cases, accessibility-based performance mea-
sures have been applied in regional scenario planning as well.11 However, these
accessibility metrics rarely displace their more commonly used mobility-based
counterparts.
    The accessibility metrics most commonly applied in regional planning are
simple and easy to interpret. They are typically cumulative-opportunity-based
measures of residential access to jobs, such as the average number of jobs that
area residents can reach by auto within thirty minutes. Some metropolitan
areas disaggregate their accessibility to jobs measures by population group or
by mode.12 Disaggregating by population group allows analysts to assess how
various scenarios perform with regard to equity. Disaggregating by mode also
enables analysis of multimodal accessibility, or how future scenarios perform
with respect to public-transport, auto, and active-transportation accessibility.
    Regional-scenario planning serves an important purpose by offering a big-
picture view of transportation objectives and priorities at the metropolitan
scale, but frequently lacks explicit links to implementation. Regional change
unfolds over many years as the product of thousands of individual land-use
and transportation decisions, each of which contributes only marginally to
changes in the population’s regional accessibility. Regional-scenario planning by
itself is inadequate for everyday planning decisions for two main reasons. First,
regional-scenario plans are generally advisory and are not inherently linked to
implementation, at least in the United States. Instead, such scenario plans pro-
mote an overall regional vision, which local governments then implement to
varying degrees at their discretion.13 Second, regional-scenario plans present
a limited and purposefully simplified choice set. They offer only a handful of
regional alternatives that are all presented at a single future point in time, remov-
ing the dynamic complexity of the transportation–land use relationship. Missing
from this limited set of scenarios are the impacts of hundreds or thousands of
small, incremental changes that are neither prohibited by nor required by any
specific scenario.
                                       ACCESSIBILITY IN EVERYDAY PLANNING        55


From Regional Analysis to Project Analysis
Moving accessibility-based evaluation from the regional scenario to the proj-
ect level involves more than applying regional tools to individual decisions,
because project-level analysis is inherently different from a regional analysis.
Part of the difference is in geographic scale, since an individual land-use or
transportation project is nearly always less than regional in its scale. But the
more important difference is a shift in the question being asked. Regional
scenarios of transportation/land-use systems, whether current assessments
or forecasts of potential futures, are complete and well-defined states at a
fixed point in time. Thus, regional-scenario accessibility analysis amounts to
a snapshot in time that inherently captures both transportation and land-use
aspects.14
    By contrast, project-level evaluation begins as an analysis of a marginal change
in either the transportation system or the land-use system, and on rare occa-
sions, in both. The sector-specific nature of the change complicates its evaluation
because a change to land use, for example, also has impacts on the transpor-
tation system, which must be forecast. Furthermore, whereas future alternative
scenarios are readily compared with one another, the basis of comparison for a
marginal change in land use is not self-evident. In addition, projects are often
quite small in relation to the regions of interest. This scale difference can make
accessibility analysis more challenging than when analyzing dramatically differ-
ing regional futures.


Attributes of Project-Level Accessibility Evaluation
Project-level accessibility evaluation differs from regional-scenario analysis in
three important dimensions. These dimensions vary somewhat depending on
whether land-development or transportation-investment projects are being
considered.

   C O MP L EME N TA RY S YS TE M
The impacts of projects on the complementary system must be forecast before
they can be analyzed. That is, land-development plans require an analysis
of their mobility (or traffic) impacts, and transportation plans need analysis of
their land-use change impacts. For project-level analysis, neglecting the impact
of transportation on land use or vice versa amounts to an implicit assump-
tion of “no impact.” The land-use effects of a transportation investment pose a
modeling challenge because such changes take time to materialize. Nevertheless,
anticipating the land-use impacts of a transportation investment is essential to
56          CHAPTER 3


a meaningful analysis of accessibility because, under the implicit assumption of
“no land-use impact,” all mobility improvements become accessibility improve-
ments. Only when the possibility of induced development is introduced do
accessibility and mobility become truly separate measures. In the evaluation of
land-development projects, the forecasting step faces other challenges. Although
such projects are regularly evaluated for their mobility impacts via traffic-impact
analysis, these analyses are highly localized, so their regional impacts are not
readily apparent.

     BA S I S O F C O M PA R I S O N
The second attribute required for project-level evaluation, particularly as
pertains to a land-development project, is a meaningful basis of compari-
son for each project under evaluation. Should it be compared with the same
amount of development in a different location? If so, which locations should
be considered? Analyzing the accessibility impact of a proposed development
is also made more difficult because the identities of its future residents are
unknown, as are the locations from which they would move, and the loca-
tions they would choose if the project were not developed. For this reason,
it can be unclear what alternatives a particular land-development proposal
should be compared to in order to gauge its accessibility impacts. Transporta-
tion projects, frequently the product of direct governmental investment, differ
from land-development projects in this regard. Transportation projects are
typically drawn from a long list of potential projects, only some of which can
be funded. Therefore, they can more readily be compared to one another with
regard to their accessibility impacts. Also, it has long been customary in the
transportation field to compare build and no-build scenarios for proposed
transportation projects.

     SC A L I N G TO R E G I O NA L I M PAC T
A final challenge more particular to land-use projects stems from the size of
the project relative to the size of its region. Individual development projects are
drops in the ocean of regional accessibility, yet they can add up to substantial
change as such projects accumulate over time. Some transportation projects are
also quite small and may have barely noticeable effects. However, transportation
projects amenable to accessibility analysis are typically much larger in scale and
therefore have more readily discernible impacts on the availability of regional
destinations. Since an individual land-development project will barely affect
region-wide accessibility, analyses must be scaled to the magnitude of the project
in question.
                                         ACCESSIBILITY IN EVERYDAY PLANNING           57


Evaluating the Accessibility of
Land-Use Developments
A new land-use development creates two impacts on accessibility patterns, one
via proximity and the other via speed. A development’s residential component
can be thought of as new origins, and any commercial component can be thought
of as new work or nonwork destinations. Therefore, the development’s accessibil-
ity impact depends in part on its physical location. For example, if a new residen-
tial development is allowed in an area with high accessibility, then it is likely that
the development will result in greater average accessibility overall for the region,
as long as its impact on traffic is not too severe. Likewise, allowing new destina-
tions in a location that is currently sparse in destinations can also boost regional
accessibility. The speed impact of a new development results from its users add-
ing vehicles onto the road network, thereby slowing down traffic, an impact that
is traditionally analyzed via traffic-impact analysis. While the method developed
here builds on traffic-impact analysis for its mobility component, it is intended
to show how analysis can go beyond a focus on mobility to become a true
accessibility-based evaluation.
    Under this approach, land-use change is derived from the size of the proj-
ect itself, gauged here in terms of population for residential development and
employment for commercial development. This land-use change affects the
complementary system (transportation) in the form of additional traffic, ana-
lyzed here by importing the results of a traditional traffic-impact analysis. Such
analyses forecast additional delays, denominated in seconds, to intersections near
the proposed developments. These delays, together with the land-development
proposals themselves, are then used to calculate accessibility impacts.
    The key innovation of the method is the measurement of accessibility impacts
through the accessibility elasticity. Accessibility elasticity is defined as the percent-
age change in regional accessibility divided by the percentage change in regional
size associated with the proposal. It is calculated with respect to population for
residential developments, and with respect to jobs for nonresidential develop-
ments such as retail or commercial.
    The accessibility-elasticity metric solves two problems: establishing a basis
of comparison and scaling to regional impact. The implicit basis of compari-
son of the accessibility-elasticity metric is the existing built environment in the
region in question. An accessibility elasticity of 1.0 indicates that the marginal
person or job at the contemplated location contributes to the total accessibil-
ity of the region equivalently to the average current regional resident or job.
Elasticities of over 1.0 indicate that incoming people or jobs are contributing
more than the average; elasticities of less than 1.0 indicate that the contemplated
58          CHAPTER 3


project degrades average accessibility relative to the existing pattern of develop-
ment. This is much simpler than, for example, comparing a proposed develop-
ment with an equivalent development in other locations, which would involve
performing complex additional analyses to establish plausible hypothetical
alternatives.
    The second problem that accessibility elasticity solves is that of scaling to
regional-level impacts. A single, small-scale project scarcely moves the regional
accessibility needle at all. But since the percentage change in regional popula-
tion or jobs is used in the denominator of the accessibility-elasticity calcu-
lation, the metric is calibrated to compare the effect of even small marginal
changes. The accessibility-elasticity metric neutralizes the effect of the devel-
opment’s size, so both small and large developments can be compared on an
equivalent basis.15


Step-by-Step Procedure
The procedure is illustrated here with data from three proposed developments in
Ann Arbor, Michigan, shown in figure 3.3.

     A RB O R HI L L S
This is a high-end retail development located about six kilometers from down-
town Ann Arbor along the major east-west corridor of Washtenaw Avenue. It
includes 8,400 square meters of retail space with 692 estimated trips occurring
during the afternoon peak hour. Traffic-impact analysis was conducted in May
2011.

     41 3 EA S T HURO N
This is a residential tower located in downtown Ann Arbor including 216 resi-
dential units and 450 commercial square meters on the ground floor (the impact
of the commercial is not included in this accessibility analysis). Peak trips for this
development were estimated at 112 for the 4:45–5:45 p.m. hour. Traffic-impact
analysis was conducted in 2012.

     N I XO N C O N D O M I N I U M S
This is a moderate-density residential development of 473 units located about
six kilometers from downtown Ann Arbor, contiguous to existing single-family
and multifamily residential developments. Trips were projected at 265 at the
8:00–9:00 a.m. morning peak period. Traffic-impact analysis for this project was
conducted in 2014.
                                        ACCESSIBILITY IN EVERYDAY PLANNING          59




      N
               Washtenaw County
                                                                Ann Arbor
                                              Nixon Condos


                                        413 E Huron
                                              Arbor Hills




                                          0       5    10           20 kilometers

FIGURE 3.3.     Locations of land-use development projects in Ann Arbor,
Michigan


  There are several analytical steps to implementing the accessibility-elasticity
metric.

   CALCULATE TOTAL REGIONAL ACCESSIBILITY
For this case study, we employed a gravity-based accessibility formula to measure
total countywide accessibility to all employment for Washtenaw County, Michi-
gan. The Southeast Michigan Council of Governments provided population and
employment counts by traffic-analysis zone (TAZ) and auto travel times between
zones by time of day: a.m. peak, p.m. peak, and off peak. Based on research that
suggests a relationship between metropolitan population size and the work-
travel impedance function,16 a range of impedance coefficients typical for work
travel for smaller metropolitan areas was used. Total regional accessibility is the
sum of accessibility from each zone multiplied by the resident population in each
zone. Total accessibility, rather than average accessibility, is used in this analysis
because the effects of population growth are incorporated at later stages through
the elasticity calculation.

   CONDUCT A TRAFFIC-IMPACT ANALYSIS
Based on traffic-impact analyses conducted for the projects, an average delay for
each surrounding intersection is calculated.
60           CHAPTER 3


     UPDATE REGIONAL TRAVEL TIMES
Intersection-level delays from the previous step are assigned to zone-to-zone
travel times via a routing procedure.17 This is completed by calculating the route
from every zone to every other zone and identifying which routes run through
the affected intersections. This computationally intensive procedure is imple-
mented with programming and makes use of open-source mapping and routing
data. The result is a new set of zone-to-zone travel times which accounts for the
delays created by the proposed development.

     UPDATE REGIONAL LAND USE
Given the proposed development’s location and size, either population or
employment is added to the appropriate zone. Housing units are changed into
a population change based on average household sizes for each particular type
of housing unit within the region. To convert retail development size into retail
employment, the Planners Estimating Guide suggests that each retail job requires
approximately 47 square meters (510 square feet) of space.18

     CALCULATE THE ACCESSIBILITY ELASTICITY
With new forecast information on land-use and transportation patterns that
will result from a project, a new, postdevelopment total regional accessibility is
calculated. The same gravity accessibility formula is used, but with new travel
times, new population counts, and new employment (as destination activities)
information.
    Accessibility elasticity is computed as the proportional change in accessibil-
ity divided by the proportional change in regional size (see equation 3.1). The
accessibility elasticity score minus 1 yields the percentage by which the proposed
development outperforms or underperforms the current average accessibility of
the region.



     accessibility elasticity =
                                         ( access   after
                                                                          )
                                                            − accessbefore / accessbefore
                                                                                                           (3.1)
                                  ( population   after
                                                         − population   before
                                                                                 ) / population   before




Accessibility Results for Proposed Ann Arbor Developments
The results of the accessibility evaluation of the three land-use development
projects indicate that two projects exceed the average-accessibility threshold for
Washtenaw County: 413 East Huron (1.86) and Arbor Hills (1.49), with 413 East
Huron providing somewhat higher accessibility overall (table 3.1). The Nixon
Condominiums project has an elasticity of less than 1.0, which indicates that an
                                               ACCESSIBILITY IN EVERYDAY PLANNING             61


TABLE 3.1          Accessibility analysis of land-use developments in Ann Arbor to jobs
by auto
PROJECT NAME                  NIXON CONDOMINIUMS        413 EAST HURON          ARBOR HILLS

A. Development type               Population              Population        Retail employment
                                  (residential)           (residential)         (commercial)
B. Analysis area              Washtenaw County        Washtenaw County      Washtenaw County
C. Impedance coefficient            0.13                    0.13                    0.28
D. Time of day                       AM                      AM                     PM
E. Accessibility before          7.439E+09               7.439E+09              1.020E+08
F. Accessibility after           7.448E+09               7.452E+09              1.035E+08
G. Percent change                  0.125%                  0.182%                 1.455%
  in accessibility
  [(F/E)–1]*100
H. Total baseline before     344,791 (population)    344,791 (population)   19,466 (retail jobs)
I. Total baseline after      345,529 (population)    345,128 (population)   19,644 (retail jobs)
J. Percent change                  0.214%                  0.098%                 0.914%
  in baseline
  [(I/H)–1]*100
K. Accessibility                    0.59                    1.86                    1.49
  elasticity (G/J)




incoming new resident would contribute less accessibility than the regional aver-
age. Each resident of 413 East Huron would contribute auto accessibility to work
at a rate 86 percent higher than the average resident of Washtenaw County. By
contrast, each resident of Nixon Condominiums would contribute accessibility
at a rate 41 percent lower than the county average. As a retail facility, Arbor Hills
is evaluated on the basis of the jobs it is expected to contain; each job at that site
contributes accessibility at a rate 49 percent greater than the average retail job in
Washtenaw County.
    Depending on circumstances, planners may have good reason to advocate for
projects that result in elasticities of less than 1.0. Indeed, based on this small
sample, it is clear that the 1.0 threshold is relatively difficult to reach for a new
development, except in locations quite close to the urban center. The necessary
level of accessibility elasticity for development approval will require analysts to
make judgments tailored to local circumstances.


Beyond Traffic Impact Analysis
Projects like the ones shown here all result in added forecast roadway congestion;
local jurisdictions typically need to decide, after a traffic-impact analysis, whether
62        CHAPTER 3


the cost of worsened congestion is at an acceptably low level. The proposed acces-
sibility elasticity method goes beyond the mobility-only focus of traffic-impact
analysis to show not just the cost of congestion but also the countervailing ben-
efits of enhanced accessibility.
    Development approval must consider multiple factors beyond accessibility
alone, such as the adequacy of infrastructure, the quality of the urban design,
and consistency with current zoning. However, to the extent that transportation
is the issue at hand, accessibility impacts should be the primary benchmark by
which transportation-related impacts are assessed. Although the case study dem-
onstrated here is focused on automobile-based accessibility, the method can be
extended to other modes as well. A thorough accessibility evaluation for a pro-
posed development project would take into account the accessibility impacts for
all modes and consider the importance of each mode according to local planning
priorities.



Evaluating the Accessibility of
Transportation Projects
Like the accessibility analysis of land-development proposals, the analysis of
transportation investments’ accessibility requires a forecast of impacts on the
complementary system (land use in the case of transportation projects). Forecast-
ing impacts of transportation investment on land use is more complex than the
reverse, however, because land-use impacts materialize over a longer time frame
and also because there is greater uncertainty in the land-use forecasting process.
The case study that follows demonstrates accessibility-based analyses for trans-
portation projects and compares the results to a pure mobility-based analysis.
   The accessibility-based evaluation ultimately comes to different conclusions
than an evaluation based solely on mobility impacts. Transportation projects
have two effects on accessibility, one short term and direct, and the other long
term and indirect. Traditionally only the short-term, mobility-based impacts have
been considered in transportation plan and project evaluation. The short-term
impact is the reduction in travel times, costs, or distances resulting from the new
infrastructure; this speed component increases accessibility by reducing general-
ized travel costs. The long-term impact is from the induced land-use effects,19
which may counteract these short-term mobility-based benefits through land-
use dispersal, or, alternatively, enhance them through land-use concentration.
   Transportation analysts commonly take the future spatial distribution of land
uses as fixed and exogenous to the transportation planning process to allow them
to predict trip patterns. This may be due to a number of factors, including lack
                                          ACCESSIBILITY IN EVERYDAY PLANNING              63


of technical capacity, since few metropolitan planning organizations maintain
integrated transportation/land-use models; the politicized and hence hard-to-
predict nature of land-use decision making; and the desire to garner resources
for infrastructure investment without calling attention to undesirable land-
use impacts. Taking future land-use patterns as exogenous, that is, unaffected
by transportation investments, biases forecasts of the accessibility impacts of
transportation projects. Because transportation projects do shift future land-use
patterns, land-use shifts must be taken into account within any comprehensive
accessibility analysis of transportation projects.
   The following case study illustrates an approach to accessibility-based trans-
portation project analysis that incorporates the potential for induced land-use
change, employing a land-use model to forecast how proposed transportation
projects are likely to affect employment and residential locations. This contrasts
with the current state of the practice (figure 3.4, bottom) in which a future land-
use forecast serves only as an input into shaping future travel patterns.
   The proposed method addresses all the requirements for a project-level acces-
sibility analysis. Impacts to the transportation system and the land-use system
are forecast through a travel-demand model and a land-use model, respectively.
In this case, the land-use component of accessibility is calculated based on fore-
casts of the locations of jobs by industry and households by income category
in future years. The basis of comparison for transportation projects here is the
no-build scenario.
   The scale of project that is analyzable in accessibility terms differs between the
land-development and transportation contexts. Any land-development project
that is amenable to traffic-impact analysis can be analyzed for accessibility impacts
using the approach described in this chapter. By contrast, a transportation project


                                           Proposed technique
                    Accessibility                                            Accessibility
                   analysis of no                                          analysis of build
                       build



   Land use                           Proposed new      Updated travel      Updated land
                   Travel patterns    infrastructure      patterns           use forecast
   forecast




                  Mobility analysis                    Mobility analysis
                    of no bulid                           of build

                Current state of the practice

FIGURE 3.4.    Accessibility-based transportation project evaluation
64        CHAPTER 3


would need to be significant at the regional scale before its land-use impacts
could be meaningfully forecast. Individual transportation projects that fall below
the threshold of discernible land-use impacts could be bundled into larger plans
for analytic purposes. We have used this latter approach, analyzing a relatively
large bundle of projects to ensure that the land-use effects are significant and play
a role in the final accessibility impact analysis.

The Mobility 2040 Plan
The San Antonio, Texas, metropolitan area, also known as the Alamo Area, is
a fast-growing region with significant planned investment in new roadways.
According to the region’s long-range transportation plan, the metropolitan-area
population is expected to grow from 2.0 million in 2010 to 3.4 million by 2040.20
Employment is likewise expected to grow rapidly from 0.9 million jobs in 2010
to 1.7 million jobs. Employment centers are located in historic downtown San
Antonio, as well as in a band following a circumferential highway along the
northern suburbs. The metropolitan San Antonio region embodies a strong
decentralization trend, with the highest population and employment growth
between 2000 and 2010 occurring in suburban locations and along major high-
way corridors.
   The entire Mobility 2040 plan is analyzed here, including all the proposed
roadway expansion projects in the region’s long-term transportation plan,
adopted in 2014. The time horizon for the accessibility analysis is 2020, so
only transportation impacts through the year 2020 are considered. The fore-
casts are built on the baseline year of 2010. The twenty-five-year plan includes
a total of $17.2 billion in transportation funding for operations, mainte-
nance, safety improvements, and roadway expansions, including significant
investment in radial freeways extending outward from the metropolitan core.
Approximately $2.1 billion of this total is applied to roadway and capacity
expansions.

Forecasting Land-Use Impacts
The land-use model forecasts change in numbers of households and employ-
ment by location and type based on trends prior to the baseline year (in this
case, 2005–10). The Alamo Area Metropolitan Planning Organization provided
detailed land-use data for 2010, which enabled the calibration of the land-
consumption component of the land-use model. Based on these data, a zone-
based land-use model, known as TELUM, was used to forecast 2020 land-use
patterns for both the build and no-build scenarios. Two different 2020 travel-
time matrices, corresponding respectively to the build and no-build scenarios,
                                       ACCESSIBILITY IN EVERYDAY PLANNING        65


were fed into the model to produce two distinct land-use forecasts for the future
of the Alamo Area region. The challenges of land-use forecasting, together with
the relatively coarse nature of the TELUM model, mean that any land-use fore-
cast comes with a great deal of uncertainty. TELUM was used for this project
not because it is the best land-use forecasting model available, but because of
its ready availability to planners in local practice. TELUM’s forecasts are not
presented as fact, but as superior to standard travel-demand modeling with its
implicit assumption of no land-use impacts whatsoever.
    Work accessibility by automobile was calculated for each of the two sce-
narios with a gravity model (see equations 3.2 and 3.3). Because the TELUM
land-use model produces population forecasts by household type and employ-
ment forecasts by industry type, a variety of accessibility metrics are possible;
for example, it is possible to calculate the accessibility impacts on low-income
households separately from the impacts on high-income households. How-
ever, only aggregate average population accessibility impacts are reported here.
The travel cost for the accessibility calculations in this case is peak-hour auto
travel times.


          ∑ g ∗e       −0 14∗t ij
   ai =          j                                                            (3.2)
             i


   ARegion       ∑ ah i i i
                                                                              (3.3)


    ARegion is the total household-weighted accessibility to jobs for the San Anto-
nio metropolitan region. It is calculated via two steps: the first step is to cal-
culate accessibility for each zone (in this case the zones are census tracts), and
the second step is to weight the accessibility in each zone by the number of
households in that zone. For these equations, ai is accessibility for zone i, hi
is the number of households residing in zone i, gj is the total number of jobs
located in zone j, tij is the auto-based travel time between zone i and j during the
peak hour, and –0.14 is the impedance coefficient. Changes to mobility were
also examined for each of the two scenarios by comparing the aggregate (sum
total) travel times for 2020 vehicle flows across the metropolitan region. We
summed projected peak-hour zone-to-zone vehicle flows adding up the peak-
hour vehicular travel time for each individual vehicle flow. In equation 3.4, T is
the aggregate regional sum of peak-hour travel times in minutes, fij is the flow
of vehicles from zone i to zone j over the peak hour, and tij is the peak-hour
travel time from zone i to zone j.

   T      ∑ f ∗t
             i j ij     ij                                                    (3.4)
66        CHAPTER 3


    The mobility and accessibility implications of the Mobility 2040 long-
range plan are examined through a comparison of the build and no-build sce-
narios. The build scenario represents what would happen if all the Mobility
2040 roadway expansion projects planned through 2020 were built and the
associated land-use changes occurred. The no-build scenario represents what
would happen if none of the Mobility 2040 projects were built and includes
the land-use patterns that would result from not introducing any new roadway
infrastructure.
    Anticipated household gains that result from the Mobility 2040 projects are
concentrated along the northern metropolitan fringe, in particular in the north-
east. Population losses are concentrated in the northern, inner-ring suburbs and
much of the central city (figure 3.5). Employment gains due to the transporta-
tion plan cluster in the far northwest and northeast of the region, while employ-
ment losses are scattered throughout the central city and the northern inner ring
(figure 3.6).
    Table 3.2 portrays mobility and accessibility performance across four sce-
narios: build, no-build, speed-only effects, and year 2010. The results indicate




FIGURE 3.5. Forecast household shift due to Alamo transportation plan
for 2020. Darker areas indicate areas with higher population growth (or less
population decrease).
FIGURE 3.6. Forecast employment shift due to Alamo transportation plan
for 2020. Darker areas indicate areas with higher employment growth (or less
employment decrease).



Table 3.2 Alamo area long-range transportation plan mobility and accessibility
impacts for 2020
                                       BUILD        NO-BUILD       SPEED-ONLY      YEAR 2010
                                     SCENARIO       SCENARIO        EFFECTS

Mobility impacts                                   Aggregate auto travel time
Vehicular travel time, minutes      82,098,736    86,908,769           NA         73,189,146
Average trip time, minutes               24.59           26.03         NA               21.92
Percent difference no-build              –5.5%         NA              NA             NA
Percent difference with 2010            12.2%            18.7%         NA             NA
Accessibility impacts                 Gravity-weighted auto accessibility to all employment
Minimum zone                                22              21              21                66
Maximum zone                            96,340         96,069         97,071         107,978
Mean zone                               28,105         27,790         28,298           29,330
Standard Deviation                      23,335         23,635         23,553           25,382
Population-weighted accessibility       24,406         24,446         25,194           27,988
Percent difference no-build              –0.2%         NA               3.1%          NA
Percent difference with 2010            –12.8%         –12.7%         –10.0%          NA
68        CHAPTER 3


that the mobility improvements of the Alamo’s Mobility 2040 Plan through
2020 are considerable. By contrast, its accessibility impacts are negligible. The
build scenario reduces aggregate peak-hour travel time by 5.5 percent. In addi-
tion, if the associated transportation projects had no land-use effect, that is,
if they only changed interzonal speeds, they would increase average house-
hold accessibility by 3.1 percent. The reason the accessibility improvement
is smaller than the mobility improvement is that accessibility incorporates
household locations, and the speed improvements are predominantly concen-
trated in less-populated areas of the region. However, after the land-use effects
are taken into account, the net average accessibility benefits for the region
are –0.2 percent.


Mobility Analysis Is Not the Same as Accessibility Analysis
The Mobility 2040 Plan demonstrates mobility benefits through decreased
average peak-hour travel times, but it offers no net accessibility benefits for the
average resident of the San Antonio metropolitan region. The proposed trans-
portation plan is forecast to decentralize both households and employment, and
with these anticipated land-use shifts over a ten-year time horizon, the average
household has no greater accessibility in 2020 than if no roadway expansion proj-
ects were completed at all (i.e., the no-build scenario). The advantage of faster
speeds, which are documented in the mobility analysis, is completely counter-
balanced by the land-use decentralization induced by the planned portfolio of
roadway projects.
   A contrasting case is found in a subset of the Mobility 2040 projects, termed
“Loop 1604.” This suite of upgrades to a ring expressway north of San Antonio
was modeled for its accessibility effects compared to a baseline defined as the
remainder of the Mobility 2040 projects (as opposed to a no-build alternative).21
In this comparison, the Loop 1604 projects were forecast to concentrate land
uses compared to the Mobility 2040 minus Loop 1604 forecasts, which feature
extensive low-density peripheral development. As a consequence, Loop 1604’s
accessibility impacts were markedly positive, with the land-use impacts amplify-
ing, rather than reversing, their mobility effects.
   In the full analysis, the Loop 1604 projects offered a triply compounded acces-
sibility benefit. First, average auto travel speeds increased, which, all else being
equal, increases accessibility. Second, these travel-speed improvements were
focused on concentrated areas of population and employment, so the benefit
of these mobility enhancements occurred where the most people actually travel.
And third, the Loop 1604 projects were forecast to spur the centralization of
                                       ACCESSIBILITY IN EVERYDAY PLANNING        69


population and employment relative to the no-build scenario. As a consequence,
a mobility-based analysis of Loop 1604 would actually significantly underesti-
mate its auto accessibility benefits.
    Although the evaluations presented here assess accessibility impacts for the
average household, the method readily supports the disaggregation of accessi-
bility impacts, including a differentiation of accessibility impacts by household
type (e.g., by income), by destination type (e.g., work, nonwork, shopping, health
care), and by mode (public transport, bicycle, walking). The key to the proposed
method is that induced land-use effects of transportation projects must be taken
into account for a full and fair accessibility evaluation.



Integrating Accessibility into Everyday Planning
Analysis of transportation or land-use projects differs from regional-scenario-
based accessibility evaluation, and we have presented two methods for project-
level accessibility analysis, one for land-use projects, and the other for transpor-
tation projects. Since project-based analysis must usually consider changes in
either land use or transportation infrastructure, it requires tools that forecast
the impact of changes in one system on the other. Furthermore, any marginal
project-level change must be evaluated with respect to some meaningful basis of
comparison. The methods illustrated here address these various challenges for
conducting an accessibility analysis at the project level.
    As we have demonstrated, transportation analysis that employs mobility
tools alone can lead to perverse outcomes. Projects that enhance mobility do
not necessarily enhance accessibility—indeed, they can even degrade it. The
best-performing land-use development evaluated here, which is located in the
central part of downtown Ann Arbor, Michigan, scores poorly when it is evalu-
ated with traffic-impact analysis alone. The Mobility 2040 Plan, of San Antonio,
Texas, improves peak-hour vehicle speeds, but actually offers no net accessibility
benefits to the average household once anticipated land-use changes are taken
into account.
    In every case where a transportation-related planning decision must be
made, there is a way to analyze that decision from an accessibility-centered point
of view. If existing transportation-analysis tools consider only travel times or
speeds, then these tools are mobility based, and planners who rely on such prac-
tices will fail to distinguish between accessibility-improving and accessibility-
degrading projects. Realization of the accessibility shift demands new tools and
methods that are applicable to decision making in everyday planning, including
70        CHAPTER 3


methods appropriate to evaluating project-level decisions.22 This project-level
analysis is an essential complement to the growing body of regional-scenario
analyses that are increasingly incorporating accessibility metrics. Project-level
accessibility analysis is necessary for enabling accessibility thinking to move out
of the airy realm of concept, theory, and visioning and into the grounded every-
day of transportation- and land-use-planning practice.
                                                                      4
ACCESSIBILITY AND URBAN FORM




A prevalent view among urban planning researchers is that low-density, auto-
oriented metropolitan regions are also low-accessibility areas.1 While we argue
against equating such areas with poor accessibility by definition, accessibility in
these regions may in fact be measurably low. This view, if supported, would have
important implications for policy reform. Compact-city and smart-growth plan-
ning approaches would have a transportation-improvement rationale. Though
they are not designed for high automotive travel speeds, they could nevertheless
increase accessibility and thereby yield a transportation benefit, potentially even
for car travel. Transportation, environmental, and societal goals might be more
synergistic than is generally thought as policy shifts allowing for closer destina-
tions and less car travel lead to improvements in accessibility, even if they slow
traffic somewhat.
   Claims that higher densities degrade transportation outcomes abound,
yet these are based almost entirely in a mobility logic. New York City, for
instance, has been singled out as a particularly problematic transportation case
based strictly on its congestion; the fact that its density offers greater origin-
destination proximity than most locales has not entered into the analysis.2 The
sentiment that densities should be restricted for the sake of mobility is simi-
larly reflected in planning conflicts from numerous countries around the world
(text box 4.1).




                                                                       71
72          CHAPTER 4




     Text box 4.1. International examples of calls
     for planning to limit densities based
     on congestion concerns
     Daily Camera (Boulder, Colorado, United States). “Planning Board
     Rejects North Boulder Middle-Income Housing Proposal.” December 2,
     2016: “Just before midnight Thursday, the Boulder Planning Board
     rejected a proposed mixed-use development with commercial space and
     50 middle-income housing units near the corner of Broadway and Iris
     Avenue. . . . Opponents at Thursday’s hearing urged the city’s Planning
     Board to deny the project, because it’s too dense, too tall and threatens to
     exacerbate traffic and parking woes.”
         New Straits Times (Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia). “High-Density Project
     Gets Residents Down.” July 3, 2010: “Residents of Kuchai Entrepreneurs
     Park want City Hall to reject a proposed high-density condominium on
     grounds that it will add to the congestion in the area. The residents learnt
     of the development through a sign erected at Lot 1221, Jalan Kuchai Lama
     about two weeks ago.”
         Sentinel (Stoke-on-Trent, United Kingdom). “900-Home Plan Is Bun-
     kered.” September 1, 2016: “‘INAPPROPRIATE’ plans to build 900 homes
     on a former golf course have been blocked. . . . Haddon Property Develop-
     ments wanted to build the houses—along with shops and a school—on the
     site of Gorstyhill Golf Course, near Crewe. Villagers in Wychwood, which
     is encircled by the course, objected to the scheme, saying it would mean the
     loss of a leisure facility and lead to traffic chaos.”
         Prince George Citizen (Prince George, British Columbia, Canada). “Coun-
     cil Rejects Housing Project.” April 26, 2017: “City council has rejected a
     rezoning application for a multifamily residential development in a Spruce
     Street neighbourhood. . . . Coun. Brian Skakun opposed the application.
         “‘This makes no sense to me. I support the residents. This is making a
     bad problem worse especially in terms of traffic,’ Skakun said.”




   While higher densities frequently degrade traffic speeds, they could enhance
accessibility if the increase in proximity they support outweighs any slowing of
travel (see chapter 3). If this were the case, the densities would confer a trans-
portation benefit, rather than creating a problem to be solved. And the converse
would also be true: land-use regulations to enforce a low-density development
                                            ACCESSIBILITY AND URBAN FORM         73


pattern could be potentially harmful to transportation goals (defined again in
accessibility terms) even if they succeeded in keeping the traffic flowing rapidly.
A nationwide comparison of metropolitan job accessibility by auto is sugges-
tive in this regard: of the ten metropolitan areas with the greatest job accessibil-
ity by auto, six are also found on the list of the ten areas with the greatest loss
in job accessibility due to congestion.3 While congestion reduces accessibility, it
appears that some external factor tends to lead both to high automotive acces-
sibility and to high roadway congestion. This factor may be urban form. If one
defines accessibility in urbanist terms—an approach we reject (see chapter 2)—
then the relationship of land-use patterns to accessibility is a foregone conclu-
sion. But low-density regions with a high degree of separation of land uses do not
necessarily demonstrate low accessibility. This is because a low-density pattern
of settlement can have high accessibility (at least by motorized modes) if speeds
are fast enough to compensate for the great distances. Which urban forms lead to
higher accessibility is an empirical, not a definitional, question.
    Empirical analysis of the relationship between urban form and accessibility
can be accomplished by comparing the same regions over time or by comparing
a range of regions at a single point in time.4 In this chapter, we compare acces-
sibility across metropolitan regions in the United States using this cross-sectional
approach, estimating auto-based work accessibility metrics for thirty-eight of the
largest fifty metropolitan regions in the United States. The automobile focus here
is designed to test for potential accessibility benefits to compact metropolitan
urban form that are not self-evident. Compactness supports public-transport
accessibility (see chapter 5) in line with expectations; by contrast, low-density
development is often thought to benefit auto-oriented transportation systems.
    Much of the prior research on measuring accessibility is focused on case stud-
ies of single metropolitan regions.5 A smaller body of work has compared acces-
sibility between regions.6 The approach presented here can be used to analyze
accessibility differences across regions as well as accessibility change over time
within and between regions, and can help assess the factors enhancing or degrad-
ing regional accessibility, including metropolitan compactness.7



Accessibility Comparison between Regions
Intermetropolitan comparisons of accessibility present a challenge because peo-
ple in different regions have different propensities to travel in response to travel
time or cost. The concept of “minute,” “work destination,” and “nonwork destina-
tion” can be reasonably consistently defined between regions. By contrast, people’s
74         CHAPTER 4


willingness to take trips, a key element of virtually all measures of accessibility,
varies markedly from one region to another. A traveler in Los Angeles, for example,
is more likely to make a trip of sixty minutes than a traveler in a smaller region
like Omaha. Whereas in some regions, such a trip would be considered long and
hence avoided if at all possible, in others it would be routine. This is at least in part
a function of varying urban patterns; if there are few destinations nearby, but many
farther away, people are inclined to travel relatively long distances. If the reverse is
true, and there are many destinations nearby and few far away, people find much
less need for long trips. There may also be interregional differences that are unex-
plained by the physical environment in people’s innate propensity to travel.
    In gravity-based models of accessibility, differing propensities to travel across
regions are expressed in differences in coefficients of the impedance function (see
chapter 3), with higher values indicating a lower willingness to travel. The phe-
nomenon has its expression in other metrics of accessibility as well. For example,
the cumulative-opportunities model defines a travel-time radius, for example, 15,
30, or 45 minutes. Choice among these radii is analogous to the choice of an
impedance coefficient, with a short travel-time radius equating to a high coef-
ficient. The choice of both impedance coefficients in gravity-based accessibility
and the search radius in the cumulative-opportunities model will influence both
accessibility metrics, and, potentially, the ordinal accessibility ranking of the met-
ropolitan regions in the study.
    In the customary application of the gravity model, the impedance coefficient is
estimated separately for each region. Use of these varying functions for the com-
parison of accessibility across regions would lead to a logical inconsistency, how-
ever. Regions whose land-use and transportation systems require a lot of time and
money in travel demonstrate a higher propensity to travel further. For this reason,
using region-specific impedance coefficients in intermetropolitan comparisons of
accessibility is tantamount to giving the region with harder-to-reach destinations
“credit” that it does not deserve. A consistent impedance coefficient, by contrast,
creates an evenhanded metric on the ability to reach destinations across regions; it
treats a minute as equally burdensome no matter where a person lives. Therefore,
the impedance coefficient used here is the expected value for the parameter in the
median region in terms of population.8



Evaluating the Interaction of Speed
and Proximity
In order to explore the interaction of speed and proximity on accessibility, met-
ropolitan areas were paired on the basis of population size, and the distribution
                                                                              ACCESSIBILITY AND URBAN FORM             75


of accessibility was analyzed between the two regions. For example, a pairing of
metropolitan Washington, DC, with the San Francisco Bay Area reveals similar
levels of accessibility at the low end (e.g., the 1st-percentile household in acces-
sibility terms) and the high end (e.g., the 99th-percentile household in accessi-
bility terms). The rest of the distribution reveals higher accessibility for the San
Francisco Bay Area (figure 4.1). Though the horizontal axis in these graphs is
ordered simply by population percentile of the accessibility score, it has some-
thing of a geographical interpretation: since accessibility generally declines as
one moves outward from the center of the region, households at the low end of
the distribution tend to reside in peripheral areas, while those at the high end
live at the center.
    Accessibility differences between two regions may be decomposed into a
proximity component and a speed component.9 This is accomplished by trans-
forming the speed distribution of San Francisco into that of Washington, DC.


                                 600,000




                                 500,000




                                 400,000




           Accessibility score
                                 300,000




                                 200,000




                                 100,000




                                      0
                                           0%            25%                   50%        75%                 100%

                                                              Population percentile
                                                                                         Speed effect:
                                                San Francisco accessibility
                                                                                         Advantage to San Francisco
                                                Washington, DC accessibility
                                                                                         Proximity Effect:
                                                                                         Advantage to Washington, DC



FIGURE 4.1. Decomposition of accessibility differences between metropolitan
San Francisco and Washington, DC
76        CHAPTER 4


A new set of accessibility indicators are calculated for San Francisco, using travel
times derived from Washington speeds, generating a new accessibility curve
(figure 4.1).10 The transformed curve, which in this case is the lowest of the three,
represents the accessibility distribution that would hold for the San Francisco Bay
Area if travel speeds there matched those of Washington, DC. For this reason, the
gap between that curve and the San Francisco accessibility curve is entirely speed
related, while the difference with the Washington, DC, curve is entirely proximity
related. The speed-related advantage to San Francisco is thus shown as the cross-
hatched area between the top and bottom curves; the proximity-related advan-
tage to Washington is represented by the shaded area below the bottom curve.
Notwithstanding the greater density of the San Francisco Bay Area, Washington,
DC, demonstrates a proximity advantage. But that advantage is negated by the
greater magnitude of Washington, DC’s speed disadvantage; the potential acces-
sibility benefit of greater proximity was squandered by poor mobility relative to
that of the San Francisco Bay Area—in this case, automobility, since the accessibil-
ity metric is automobile-based. Here, the accessibility outcome is consistent with
traditional mobility-based transportation planning; poor mobility has degraded
the accessibility of what might otherwise be a highly accessible metropolitan area.
At the same time, this comparison demonstrates the redundancy of defining twin
goals for “mobility and accessibility.” Where mobility is sufficient to overcome a
proximity disadvantage—as in the San Francisco case—the outcome materializes
as superior accessibility. Because accessibility incorporates mobility, mobility does
not need a separate accounting to assess its benefit.
    The relationship between speeds and accessibility demonstrated in the
Washington–San Francisco comparison is not universal, however, as illustrated
by a similar decomposition of accessibility differences between another pair of
similarly sized metropolitan areas: Philadelphia and Houston (figure 4.2). Phila-
delphia enjoys a considerable accessibility advantage over Houston for most of the
population distribution. A decomposition of accessibility between the two regions
reveals that Houston enjoys a large speed advantage over Philadelphia, but suf-
fers from a proximity disadvantage. Notably, the proximity disadvantage exceeds
the speed advantage, generating an accessibility disadvantage for Houston overall.
While the Washington–San Francisco comparison illustrates how mobility can
create a higher accessibility outcome, Houston-Philadelphia provides a counter-
example: Houston’s accessibility suffers when compared to Philadelphia’s despite
Houston’s faster travel speeds. The vast distances in low-density Houston render
it less accessible than the slower but more compact Philadelphia.
                                                                        ACCESSIBILITY AND URBAN FORM         77


                                700,000




                                600,000




                                500,000




          Accessibility score
                                400,000




                                300,000




                                200,000




                                100,000




                                     0
                                          0%             25%             50%          75%             100%

                                                             Population percentile
                                           Philadelphia accessibility            Speed effect:
                                           Houston accessibility                 Advantage to Houston
                                                                                 Proximity effect:
                                                                                 Advantage to Philadelphia


FIGURE 4.2. Decomposition of accessibility differences between metropolitan
Philadelphia and Houston


   A third case presents itself as well: if region “A” enjoys both a speed and a prox-
imity advantage over region “B,” it will demonstrate higher accessibility overall.
This is the case with New York as compared with Los Angeles (figure 4.3). New
York enjoys a slight speed advantage, a considerable proximity advantage, and
an overall accessibility advantage over Los Angeles for most of the population
distribution. This finding puts the view of New York as a particularly problematic
transportation case in a different light.11 Notwithstanding the serious congestion
problems of New York City, its region has the highest accessibility of all regions
studied (a function in part of its very large size).
78                          CHAPTER 4


                            1,800,000


                            1,600,000


                            1,400,000


                            1,200,000




      Accessibility score
                            1,000,000


                             800,000


                             600,000


                             400,000


                             200,000


                                   0
                                        0%             25%               50%       75%           100%
                                                           Population percentile
                                             New York accessibility            Speed effect:
                                                                               Advantage to New York
                                             Los Angeles accessibility
                                                                               Proximity effect:
                                                                               Advantage to New York


FIGURE 4.3. Decomposition of accessibility differences between metropolitan
New York and Los Angeles



Accessibility and Urban Form Study
The analyses we have presented focus on metropolitan size but do not account
for urban form. To develop data sufficient to test the accessibility/urban-form
relationship, metropolitan planning organizations (MPOs) of the fifty largest
U.S. metropolitan regions (ranked on the metropolitan statistical area [MSA]
population count of the year 2000) were contacted with a request for travel-
demand modeling data, the central piece of information needed to calculate
peak-period auto- and employment-based accessibility scores. Due to variations
in travel-demand modeling data across different metropolitan regions, sufficient
data from thirty-eight regions were received; the remaining twelve regions were
left out of the study (appendix A, table 4a).
                                            ACCESSIBILITY AND URBAN FORM          79


    The most important data items are matrices of interactions between all zones
in a metropolitan region, including travel times and the number of trips between
zones. Local definitions of the peak period differed between regions; in each case,
the definition of the morning peak period in use in the area was employed. Mod-
els for generating travel times varied between metropolitan areas, and some of
the intermetropolitan variability in data would be attributable to these differ-
ences in data collection and modeling methods, introducing error of unknown
magnitude into future analyses.
    For work and nonwork destinations, data on business establishments were
purchased from the private vendor Claritas, Inc.12 This dataset contains several
attributes of business establishments, including the number of jobs at each loca-
tion in 2008, and classification codes from the North American Industry Classi-
fication System (NAICS), allowing identification of businesses by industry type.
All business establishments within the thirty-eight regions were geocoded to the
street-address level, then aggregated by traffic-analysis zones into the number of
work and nonwork destinations by zone.
    This study uses the gravity model as a “place-based” measure. All people resid-
ing in a zone are assigned the same level of accessibility, regardless of their per-
sonal choices of destinations or preferences for travel. Because each metropolitan
area experiences a range of accessibility distributed across its population, the
accessibility experienced by the median resident was selected as a summary sta-
tistic for evaluating overall regional performance.


Density’s Relationship with Accessibility
An examination of the relationship between accessibility and urban form con-
text could entail a host of metropolitan characteristics, including centralization,
concentration, density, and others.13 However, exploratory regression models
revealed little to no relationship between such metrics as centralization or con-
centration and accessibility; by contrast, average regional densities appeared to
be a significant determinant of median work accessibility by automobile.
    The finding that several common urban form indicators have little relation-
ship to regional accessibility is, in part, a function of a focus on the median resi-
dent. The median resident in accessibility terms of the typical U.S. metropolis
is a suburbanite (in each of the thirty-eight regions, the zone with the median
accessibility score is located outside the central city, and in many instances at a
substantial distance from the central city). In nearly every case, this individual
does not live in or near the downtown, or even in or near a suburban concen-
tration such as a downtown or transit-oriented development. Thus, the extent
80         CHAPTER 4


of these concentrations affects this person only marginally. By contrast, overall
regional densities can affect median accessibility markedly in two ways: speed
and proximity.

     S PEED
Higher densities can reduce average travel speed. Auto-ownership rates in U.S.
metropolitan regions, including higher-density regions, are high. Thus, popula-
tion density in these regions can lead to high traffic densities and therefore slow
speeds. If distances are held constant, slower travel speeds will degrade accessibility.

     P ROXI MI T Y
Higher densities can increase proximity by shortening the distance between ori-
gins and destinations. Higher-density regions put numerous destinations closer
to a given origin than their lower-density counterparts. For example, in the case
of jobs, higher job densities mean more job locations are within a closer proxim-
ity, increasing accessibility.
    Thus, the effect of density on accessibility can be thought of as the sum of the
speed effect and the proximity effect. If the speed effect dominates, low-density
regions will be more accessible; if the proximity effect dominates, high-density
regions will be more accessible.
    There are good reasons to believe that the speed effect might dominate, a phe-
nomenon that would render low-density regions more auto accessible than their
higher-density counterparts. To illustrate, consider the cumulative-opportunities
measure, or the number of destinations reachable within a given amount of time.
The territory accessible within Y minutes is an irregularly shaped area (depend-
ing on the shape of the street network) but can be roughly conceived of as a circle
(appendix A, figure 4a). When speed doubles, the radius of the circle that can be
reached within a given time doubles as well. As a consequence, the reachable area
within the circle quadruples. Given a constant density of destinations, those places
that can be reached within the specified time also quadruple with the doubling of
speeds. In this stylized case, accessibility increases with the square of speed.
    The impact of increasing densities on accessibility can be illustrated in
a similar fashion. If speeds are held constant, but the density of destinations
doubles, accessibility doubles (appendix A, figure 4b). Thus, while accessibility
increases with the square of speed, it increases linearly with density. For this rea-
son, increasing speed confers a very significant accessibility advantage, one that
will be difficult to overcome with the proximity effect. This observation tends
to support the mobility-centered view that is reflected so dominantly in current
transportation policy—but there is another possible explanation for density’s
influence on accessibility.
                                                                                                               ACCESSIBILITY AND URBAN FORM               81


Density and Speeds
Metropolitan density may influence auto travel speeds in two competing ways.
First, low-density regions typically offer more roadway capacity per person than
their high-density counterparts. Low-density regions in the United States tend to
have a high ratio of roadway lane-miles per capita, a factor that would tend to raise
travel speeds (figure 4.4). Yet the tendency for higher roadway capacity in low-
density regions appears to be at least partly negated by the higher vehicle-miles
traveled (VMT) per capita observed in these regions (figure 4.5). Low-density
regions are thus simultaneously roadway-intensive and travel-intensive. Speeds
are determined neither by vehicle-miles traveled nor by roadway miles in isolation,
but rather as a function of the interaction of the two. One broad indicator of this
interaction is traffic density, measured as the ratio of VMT to freeway lane miles.
The relatively strong (r2=0.26) negative relationship between density and VMT per
capita interacts with a somewhat stronger (r2=0.37) relationship between density
and freeway lane miles per capita. The net result is that the relationship between
population density and traffic density, while positive, is relatively weak (r2=0.11)
(figure 4.6). Lower-density regions show less traffic density than their higher-
density counterparts, but only marginally. Thus, while the speed-accessibility link


                                                                                                                                             Y = 265.31*X-0.49
                                                                                                                                             R2 power = 0.370
                                                                       Kansas City
                                      12.5




Freeway lane miles per 10,000 residents
                                                                      Richmond
                                                                            St. Louis

                                          10                    Nashville        Houston
                                                                        Charlotte
                                                                    Hartford       Louisville
                                                                                              San Antonio
                                                         Oklahoma CIty Austin
                                                                                     Cleveland
                                                    Jacksonville Providence Dayton Columbus
                                          7.5              Indianapolis         Rochester Dallas         Baltimore
                                                           Pittsburgh Cincinnati Bridgeport
                                                                                                        San Diego
                                                                           Buffalo          Minneapolis
                                                                                       Orlando Seattle
                                                       Virginia Beach Memphis Boston                       San Francisco
                                                                                          Denver Salt Lake City
                                                                            Atlanta Milwaukee                            Las Vegas
                                           5                                                               Washington
                                                                                                                                            Los Angeles
                                                                                                   Detroit                   Sacramento
                                                                    Tucson Philadelphia
                                                                                       Tampa Phoenix Portland
                                                                                                Chicago             Miami
                                                                                                         New Orleans          New York


                                          2.5


                                                0                              2000                    4000                               6000
                                                                            Urbanized area density (persons per square mile)

FIGURE 4.4. Urbanized area density and freeway lane miles per 10,000
residents. U.S. Department of Transportation, Highway Statistics 2008
(Washington, DC: Federal Highway Administration, 2008).
                                           35
                                                                              Oklahoma City
                                                                       Charlotte
                                                                                    Houston
                                                                  Tucson                                                  Las Vegas




Daily vehicle miles traveled per capita
                                                                           Nashville Orlando
                                                                    Jacksonville St. Louis
                                           30
                                                                        Austin
                                                                               Atlanta
                                                                 Richmond
                                                                  Kansas City               Tampa
                                                                Indianapolis     Louisville
                                                                                                       Detroit
                                                                         Hartford Memphis Dallas
                                           25                           Dayton                         San Antonio
                                                                                               Minneapolis Baltimore
                                                                           Columbus                                      Miami
                                                                                        Bridgeport Milwaukee
                                                        Virginia Beach Cincinnati             Denver           San Diego
                                                                               Boston                               Washington                          Los Angeles
                                                                                              Seattle
                                                                   Pittsburgh        Rochester             Phoenix
                                                                                   Buffalo Salt Lake City
                                                                     Providence              Philadelphia San Francisco
                                           20                                                       Chicago
                                                                                                                  Portland     Sacramento


                                                                                                                                    New York

                                           15
                                                                                                           New Orleans
                                                                                                                                                                        -0.24
                                                                                                                                                        Y = 152.02*X
                                                                                                                                                        R2 power = 0.257


                                           10

                                                    0                                   2000                                    4000                  6000
                                                                            Urbanized area density (persons per square mile)

FIGURE 4.5. Daily vehicle miles traveled per capita by urbanized area
density, largest fifty U.S. (census-defined) urbanized areas. U.S. Department
of Transportation, Highway Statistics 2008 (Washington, DC: Federal Highway
Administration, 2008).

                                                                                                                                                          Y = 30964.27+3.67*X
                                           80,000                                                                                                         R2 linear = 0.111
                                                                               Tucson




Ratio of daily VMT to freeway lane miles
                                                                                                 Tampa

                                           70,000


                                           60,000                                                        Chicago
                                                                                                                        Miami      Las Vegas



                                                                                                           Detroit
                                                                                    Atlanta
                                           50,000                                             Orlando
                                                                                                                     Phoenix                              Los Angeles
                                                                                                          Washington
                                                                                      Memphis            Milwaukee      Portland         Sacramento
                                                                                Jacksonville Philadelphia
                                                                                                          Denver
                                           40,000                       Oklahoma CIty            Minneapolis Salt Lake City                New York
                                                             Virginia Beach Charlotte Boston                           New Orleans
                                                                             Austin               Dallas Seattle
                                                                                     Bridgeport                      San Francisco
                                                               Indianapolis                             San Diego
                                                                                   Houston       Cincinnati
                                                                Nashville Buffalo                                     Baltimore
                                                                                        Dayton Louisville Columbus
                                           30,000                         Pittsburgh
                                                                                          Rochester       San Antonio
                                                                  Providence Hartford
                                                                                                Cleveland
                                                                        Richmond St. Louis
                                                                                   Kansas City

                                           20,000
                                                         0                                2,000                                    4,000              6,000
                                                                              Urbanized area density (persons per square mile)

FIGURE 4.6.                                                  Traffic density by population density
Source: U.S. Department of Transportation, Highway Statistics 2008 (Washington, DC: Fed-
eral Highway Administration, 2008)
                                              ACCESSIBILITY AND URBAN FORM           83


is expected to be strong, the density-speed link appears to be quite weak and, by
extension, may lead to a weak link between density and accessibility.
    These relationships were tested through a path analysis, using the thirty-eight
U.S. metropolitan areas for which data were available. Path analysis is an appli-
cation of multiple regression that aims to identify dependencies among a set of
variables. It uses several regression equations in a recursive manner to estimate
a system of interrelated variables, and it is customary to represent the results
graphically as shown in appendix A, figure 4c.
    The analysis tests the strength of relationships along causal paths. In this analy-
sis, the effect of density on accessibility via speed is compared to the effect of
density on accessibility via proximity. As expected, the effect via speed is nega-
tive and the effect via proximity is positive. But most important are the relative
magnitudes: notwithstanding the conceptual advantages of speed in generating
accessibility, density exerts a positive accessibility effect via proximity that is much
stronger than its negative effect via speeds. This finding is consistent with a 2018
study demonstrating that proximity exerts a stronger influence on job accessibility
than speeds.14
    These results—with the positive impacts of density on auto accessibility
outweighing its negative impacts—are corroborated by the data displayed in
figure 4.7. Overall, the figure demonstrates a positive relationship between
urbanized-area density and accessibility. There is also some correlation between
density and metropolitan size—New York and Los Angeles are simultaneously
two of the largest and densest regions—but the positive relationship holds even
without these cases. And even the small region of Las Vegas demonstrates high
accessibility, in part as a function of its population density.
    Las Vegas represents an interesting case for another reason as well. It is gen-
erally considered to be a fairly sprawling metropolitan area; for example, Reid
Ewing, Rolf Pendall, and Don Chen ranked it as the 48th most sprawled region
of 83 analyzed.15 Indeed, in the dimension of neighborhood mix of homes, jobs,
and services, Las Vegas was much more sprawling than the typical region. Yet its
high levels of automobile accessibility illustrate the problem with defining acces-
sibility as sprawl’s antithesis: a sprawling region can offer high auto accessibility.
While Las Vegas has achieved this through density, other regions have achieved
a similar outcome differently. For example, Kansas City, a low-density region
that is the 29th most sprawled in the study, nonetheless achieved high levels of
auto accessibility because it is relatively free from traffic congestion.16 Public-
transport accessibility is another issue entirely, and it is quite difficult for a low-
density region to achieve high scores in that regard. For example, Kansas City’s
public-transport accessibility ranks 38th out of the 49 metropolitan regions
studied by Andrew Owen, Brendan Murphy, and David Levinson.17
   84                                                CHAPTER 4


                                                                                                                                                            Y = 11900.7+95.04*X
                                                                                                                                                            R2 linear = 0.263
                                                                                                                                              New York




Median work accessibility via automobile
                                           300,000


                                           250,000

                                                                                                 Philadelphia
                                                                                                                                                                    Los Angeles
                                           200,000                           Cincinnati                                     Phoenix
                                                                                                     Dallas
                                                                                                                                                     Las Vegas
                                                                         Kansas City                 Baltimore
                                           150,000                                        Detroit
                                                                                                    Houston
                                                                                 Minneapolis                                                                  San Francisco
                                                                                                               Portland
                                                                                                 Cleveland                                    New Orleans
                                                                   Oklahoma CIty         Columbus
                                                                                                               San Diego
                                           100,000                      Orlando
                                                                           Tucson Boston
                                                              Hartford                Virginia Beach                    Denver
                                                                         Indianapolis
                                                                                            Seattle                   Chicago
                                                           Nashville Louisville    Memphis          Washington
                                            50,000                                Rochester                   San Antonio
                                                     Charlotte
                                                                      Richmond
                                                            Atlanta
                                                                                              Buffalo


                                                                      750                 1,000                   1,250               1,500              1,750                2,000
                                                                 Population density of urban area (persons per square kilometer)
                                                       Population of Year 2000 of MPO
                                                             Over 25 million                                  15–20 million              5–10 million
                                                             20–25 million                                    10–15 million              Under 5 million


      FIGURE 4.7.                                           Median work accessibility via automobile by urbanized area
      density



   Metropolitan Densities and
   Transportation-Service Quality
   For metropolitan areas in the U.S. overall, there is a positive relationship
   between density and auto accessibility. This suggests that land-use policy can
   be highly relevant to accessibility outcomes. In particular, allowing metropoli-
   tan compactness by easing land-use regulations mandating low development
   densities can improve the effectiveness of the roadway transportation system as
   defined in accessibility terms. Yet the success of the strategy remains a matter
   for empirical accessibility evaluation. The relationship between metropolitan
   density and work accessibility via automobile, while positive, is hardly iron-
   clad, and some low-density regions do offer high auto accessibility. And trans-
   portation success overall should not just consider the automobile but should
   consider accessibility via all travel modes, including walking, cycling, public
   transport, and cars.
                                           ACCESSIBILITY AND URBAN FORM        85


   By contrast, traditional mobility-based transportation evaluations tend to
militate against denser development on the theory that dense land use can lead
to dense traffic and hence congestion. The analysis presented here suggests a
more nuanced understanding of dense development: increasing density may
well be accessibility enhancing if the proximity effect on accessibility outweighs
the speed-reduction effect. Conversely, land-use regulations that constrain such
densification may degrade accessibility by car even as they strive to maintain or
enhance mobility by automobile. Whereas higher densities are frequently viewed
as a transportation disadvantage because of their impacts on automobility, they
may offer distinct transportation advantages when viewed in accessibility terms.
                                                                        5
THE SPECIAL CASE OF
PUBLIC-TRANSPORT ACCESSIBILITY




Public transport plays a special role in accessibility. Like driving, biking, or walk-
ing, its first job is to provide the mobility that allows travelers to reach their
destinations. But public transport differs from other modes in its capacity to
boost proximity indirectly; it can bring origins and destinations closer together
to shape land-use development toward higher proximity. “If a new subway sta-
tion opens near your house, you get improved mobility,” writes public-transport
consultant Jarrett Walker. “But if the station leads to new development around
it, you may get a new grocery store close to home. Even if you never ride transit,
that’s an access improvement for you.”1
    These proximity impacts operate at both local and regional scales. When public
transport enables large and concentrated downtowns to thrive, or when it facili-
tates metropolitan compactness overall, it is supporting a regional accessibility
benefit that accrues to transit users and nonusers alike. Other modes can influ-
ence proximity as well. But investments in automobile infrastructure frequently
lead to proximity reductions through the spreading of land-use development,
an effect that can degrade or even reverse the investments’ accessibility benefits
(chapter 3).2 And neither cycling nor walking generally shape the proximity of
metropolitan development with the strength and magnitude of public transport.
    Public transport also differs from other modes in that measuring its acces-
sibility involves a series of technical challenges that planners and public offi-
cials must confront when they seek to extend the accessibility shift to the transit
context. In this chapter, we consider the special challenges of public-transport

         86
                       THE SPECIAL CASE OF PUBLIC-TRANSPORT ACCESSIBILITY          87


accessibility measurement and then demonstrate one application of such mea-
surement: the assessment of bus versus rail transportation deployments for their
respective contributions to metropolitan accessibility.



Technical Challenges in Measuring
Public-Transport Accessibility
Standard approaches to accessibility measurement require adaptation in order
to account for several challenges particular to the public-transport mode. The
first and most fundamental conceptual challenge is defining travel time itself.
A public-transport trip from an origin to a destination typically involves distinct
phases: access time (the time to walk, cycle, or drive to a transit station to board
the service), waiting time (the time between a traveler’s arrival at a station and the
vehicle’s arrival at the station), boarding time (the time for the vehicle operator
to collect fares from passengers), in-vehicle time (the time a vehicle is moving
from one station to the next), transfer time (the time to transfer from one line or
mode to another), and egress time (the time to travel from the station to the final
destination). Although in-vehicle time is the most important, all elements would
ideally be included in the total public-transport travel time. But regional plan-
ning agencies have defined their overall public-transport travel time with varying
mixes of the other elements, making comparisons of accessibility difficult across
metropolitan regions or across modes for lack of consistent definitions.3 While
many of these elements of travel time are at least in principle present in other
modes, their role in public transport is much greater than in its competitors.
    Second, in contrast to automobile drivers, cyclists, and pedestrians, who
rarely have to wait before they can begin a trip, public-transport riders are
constrained by a service schedule. The periodic nature of public-transport ser-
vice is a challenge to accessibility measurement. Walker illustrates the importance
of vehicle-arrival frequency for public-transport riders with an analogy to auto-
mobile drivers: “Imagine a gate at the end of your driveway that opens only once
every 30 minutes.”4 Service that runs every 15 minutes is far more valuable to
a public-transport patron than service that runs every 30 minutes. Headways,
the gap in minutes between consecutive vehicles at a stop, tend to vary substan-
tially by location within a metropolitan region, often ranging from frequencies
as small as 10 minutes or less on high-traffic corridors in the urban core to fre-
quencies as large as 60 minutes or more for lines in outlying suburban districts.
Frequency also varies by time of day, so that a line that runs every 30 minutes
during the day might shift to 60 minutes during evening hours, and then dis-
continue service altogether late at night. Frequency varies by city size as well.
88        CHAPTER 5


Small cities commonly run lines at headways greater than 60 minutes throughout
the system.5 Accounting for these differences in frequency is essential to making
comparisons of accessibility within and across metropolitan areas.
    A common approach to accounting for the spatial and temporal variation in
service frequency in accessibility calculations has been to ignore the frequency
of public-transport lines. Such a procedure makes the simplifying assumptions
that public-transport trips are taken at the optimal time, and that travelers are
familiar with the schedule and deliberately time their trip to meet the bus or
train at its scheduled arrival time.6 For riders where service is scheduled with
long headways of, for example, 30 to 60 minutes, such an assumption may rea-
sonably represent their behavior because these travelers can expect long waits
if they arrive at a station randomly. Even if the assumption reflects most actual
behavior, it fails to account for the inconvenience associated with adherence to
a schedule, especially if an analyst wants to compare the accessibility of public
transport to that of other modes like auto and bicycle, which do not face similar
schedule constraints. For riders whose service is scheduled with short headways,
the assumption does not likely match actual behavior and thus undercounts the
total travel time by ignoring wait time.
    Early studies that tried to get around this limiting assumption applied a weight-
ing factor to accessibility metrics to account for differences in frequency, giving
more accessibility credit to public-transport stations with higher-frequency ser-
vice on average throughout a day.7 Because public-transport travel time between
an origin and destination is highly dependent on departure time, some studies
after 2010 took a more complex approach by generating a travel time for multiple
departure times—in some cases as often as every minute—in a peak period for
any single origin-destination pair, and then estimating an average travel time
for that period.8 Although using such an approach provides for a more accurate
description of public-transport accessibility, a simplified approach of using a
single, optimal departure time can provide a reasonable approximation in many
cases.
    A third challenge for public-transport accessibility is posed by transfers to
and from other modes. Every public-transport trip involves a mode other than
public transport at the origin and destination, usually by walking but sometimes
by other modes such as bicycle or automobile at park-and-ride stations. Strictly
speaking, auto accessibility does as well. But auto accessibility is commonly
calculated without considering the walking time at the origin and destination
because walking time makes up a negligible share of the total travel time for most
trips. Given the prevalence of parking spaces and a built environment oriented
toward serving auto trips, this is a sensible assumption for auto accessibility, at
least in the United States. But public-transport accessibility must include these
                       THE SPECIAL CASE OF PUBLIC-TRANSPORT ACCESSIBILITY         89


elements of the total travel time. One approach is to assume an average walk-
ing speed applied to a network distance from an origin zone’s centroid to the
starting public-transport stop, and from the ending station to the destination
zone’s centroid. An analyst might choose to set a threshold walking distance and
eliminate any zones that fall beyond the threshold. To illustrate, any zone with a
centroid farther than two kilometers from a public-transport station might be
assumed to be outside of transit’s service area and assigned a value of zero for
transit accessibility. Another approach is to avoid eliminating any zones on the
assumption that any zone can reach a public-transport stop, even if it requires the
highly improbable walking distance of several kilometers. In this case, every zone
in a metropolitan space would be assigned a nonzero value for public-transport
accessibility, with zones at a great distance from stations having miniscule values.
    Fourth, public transport itself typically consists of several variations of the
mode, including technologies such as commuter rail, heavy rail, light rail, street-
cars, buses, and express bus service. These technologies are intended to offer
highly varying types of service that tend to cater to distinct passenger groups,
with spatial and temporal variation. Therefore, a single public-transport acces-
sibility value may not be a meaningful metric. In some cases, an analysis of acces-
sibility might be more appropriately subdivided into categories of, for example,
rail accessibility and bus accessibility. In others, a weighted hybrid of the various
public-transport technologies may be appropriate.9
    A fifth challenge is that the inherently multimodal nature of public transport
requires modeled networks that tend to be less developed than the modeled net-
works used for calculating auto accessibility. Zone-to-zone travel times for auto-
mobile travel are modeled using a detailed road network that has typically been
developed and regularly maintained over many years. By contrast, many local
and regional public-transport agencies lack the capacity to maintain consistently
updated network data on routes and service schedules.10 Furthermore, while a
road network is typically constructed and maintained by a regional or state level
of government, public-transport services in most large metropolitan regions are
provided by multiple separate agencies, which can introduce inconsistency in the
regional network. However, the widely used General Transit Feed Specification
(GTFS) holds promise for addressing this inconsistency by providing a standard-
ized format for updating and disseminating network schedules and geospatial
data.11 Still, pedestrian and bicycle networks—required for calculating the time
to arrive and depart from a public-transport trip—remain highly undeveloped
and uneven. Analysts often assume that walking and cycling can follow the paths
of the road network despite the large share of roadways in most regions that offer
poor or nonexistent walking conditions. Pedestrian and bicycle paths that do not
appear in road networks are frequently not taken into account.
90         CHAPTER 5


   Finally, unlike travel by automobile, travel by public transport regularly
involves transfers from one line to another or even from one transit system to
another. Accommodating transfers in the calculation of public-transport acces-
sibility is a moderately complex technical challenge that often requires computer
programming skills and a high level of computer resources. Analysts might
assume a limit of one or two transfers, a reasonable assumption given that few
patrons transfer more than twice on a trip, because the computational com-
plexity of shortest-path algorithms increases dramatically with the number of
transfers.12



Misconceptions about Public-Transport
Accessibility
Despite the special role that public transport plays in accessibility, planners tra-
ditionally define success in public-transport systems strictly in mobility terms,
and often in ways that distort or muddle the concept of accessibility. Standard
metrics used in practice assume that the outcome of public transport that mat-
ters is moving vehicles or people; they fail to address how well public transport
is doing its job of connecting people with their destinations. For example, the
Transit Capacity and Quality of Service Manual, a guidebook produced by the
U.S. federal government to assist local agencies in evaluating service quality, rec-
ommends a range of performance metrics without any reference to accessibility
as defined here.13 Not a single evaluation measure in the widely used guidebook
can help policy makers decide whether their public-transport system performs
well in helping patrons reach their destinations. Examples of the most important
metrics include service frequency (average time interval of vehicles arriving at a
stop), hours of service (span of time that service is available throughout a day),
and service access (share of population that lives within walking distance of a
public-transport stop), all of which have their purposes, but all of which assess
mobility alone.
    This last metric, service access, is often confused with accessibility.14 For
example, a report from Arlington County, Virginia, identifies in a section titled
“Performance Measures for Accessibility” a metric defined in the report as “Per-
cent of population and employment in close proximity to pedestrian, bicycle, car
share, bike share, and transit facilities.”15 The report asserts that this metric helps
gauge the capacity to reach destinations: “Proximity to multi-modal transporta-
tion services indicates the ability for a resident or employee to be able to access
Arlington’s and the region’s destinations, services and activity centers using the
most appropriate travel mode for their trip.”16
                        THE SPECIAL CASE OF PUBLIC-TRANSPORT ACCESSIBILITY           91


    Distance to a transit station is not a measure of accessibility to destinations, but
rather an indicator of access to the public-transport system. It indicates people’s
ability to move via transit rather than their ability to reach destinations; it is a
mobility indicator and not an accessibility indicator. Distance to a station addresses
only the conditions at the origin of a trip without considering the linkage between
origin and destination. A neighborhood may have an exceptionally high degree of
access to the public-transport system, with many residents living near a station,
but if reaching a destination from that station requires a lengthy, circuitous route
interrupted by several transfers, this would not correspond with high accessibility.
    Both the passenger volumes that a public-transport system experiences and
the concept of accessibility are needed for planning and evaluation, but they must
remain conceptually separate since high accessibility may accompany low usage,
and vice versa. For example, a wealthy neighborhood may boast a high level of
public-transport service that offers excellent accessibility, but because most resi-
dents own cars and prefer to drive them, few ride public transport. By contrast,
a low-income neighborhood with many residents who have little choice but to
travel by public transport may have high ridership even if the neighborhood’s
public-transport service yields poor accessibility. Public-transport services aspire
to both high passenger usage and high-quality service; since accessibility is the
service people seek in their transportation systems, accessibility metrics are
needed to gauge the service dimension.
    The technical complexity associated with the accessibility shift partly explains
why planners and policy makers rely heavily on mobility-based evaluation in
public transport, but this shift is nevertheless essential if public agencies intend
to improve the accessibility their patrons seek when they travel. Although acces-
sibility measurement is more challenging for public transport than for other
modes, the view that a better public-transport system is one that offers people
the opportunity to reach more destinations for a given investment of time and
money provides a measurable basis of progress toward desirable land-use and
transportation outcomes. The rest of the chapter uses an empirical study to dem-
onstrate one use of accessibility metrics to evaluate the kinds of public-transport
technologies and land-use developments that can lead to better public-transport
accessibility in metropolitan areas.



What Matters Most When Planning for
Public-Transport Accessibility?
The choice among appropriate public-transport technologies has divided plan-
ners for decades, pitting bus and bus rapid transit (BRT) investments on the
92        CHAPTER 5


one hand against rail (frequently light rail transit or LRT) on the other. These
public-transport technologies have been evaluated and compared on numerous
dimensions, including cost, impact on property values, capacity to affect physi-
cal development, attractiveness to riders, capacity to offer congestion relief, and
role in urban revitalization and economic productivity.17 Urban revitalization,
enhanced economic productivity, and highway congestion relief may be desir-
able by-products of public-transport investment, but none are as fundamental
as accessibility enhancement.18
   Given the centrality of accessibility to transportation planning, one might
expect to find comparisons of bus and rail transport in terms of their respective
contribution to people’s capacity to reach destinations. Such studies are surpris-
ingly rare. One study evaluated accessibility change with an LRT deployment, but
this research was on LRT alone and was not designed to compare bus and light
rail.19 A second study modeled the impact of the size of a public-transport sys-
tem on productivity (defined in accessibility terms) and in the process presented
models of bus and rail contribution to metropolitan work accessibility.20
   The analysis presented here uses the same dataset as this second study: public-
transport accessibility data from the University of Minnesota Accessibility
Observatory.21 Building on previous research on the components of auto acces-
sibility across multiple metropolitan regions, the analysis presented here assumes
that public-transport accessibility is a product of the interaction of the mobility
provided by transportation modes and the proximity provided by metropolitan
land-use patterns.22 Metropolitan public-transport accessibility is modeled here
as an outcome that depends on factors including the population of the metro-
politan region (larger regions tend toward greater accessibility), its urban form
(denser concentrations are expected to boost public-transport accessibility), the
public-transport service deployed in rail and bus modes, and the “fit” between
the public-transport system and its metropolitan area. Public-transport service
deployment in terms of vehicle-revenue miles (VRM)—the miles that vehicles
travel while in revenue service—by transit mode is preferred here over public-
transport investment as a metric of service, since money spent on public trans-
port is complicated as a metric of service by the lumpiness of capital investment
and the variability of costs between regions.
   By making accessibility the measured outcome, we aim to provide actionable
guidance for public-transport planners and delineate policy-relevant variables.
Planners may choose to deploy more or less public-transport service across vari-
ous technologies, and they may deploy it in a more concentrated or dispersed
fashion. However, they do not directly control metropolitan size or even urban
form (though land use may respond to their investments in the longer term).
Policy variables here include the extent of public-transport deployment across
                       THE SPECIAL CASE OF PUBLIC-TRANSPORT ACCESSIBILITY        93


the various modes and the fit between a public-transport deployment and its
metropolitan region. The fit criterion, inspired by Robert Cervero’s argument
that public transport succeeds when it is designed to match the region it serves,
refers to the concentration or spread of public-transport accessibility in com-
parison to the concentration or spread of metropolitan population.23


Job Accessibility by Public Transport for Metropolitan Regions
This analysis evaluates the contribution of rail and bus public-transport modes
to job accessibility in forty-six of the largest metropolitan areas in the United
States. Rail, as defined in this study, corresponds to what the National Transit
Database (NTD) categorizes as “fixed guideway” and bus corresponds to the cat-
egory of “non-fixed guideway.”24 BRT service is difficult to isolate as a separate
mode and appears in this study in both fixed and non-fixed-guideway categories
but is a tiny fraction of each. Service identified by its operator as BRT is present
in eleven of the forty-six metropolitan areas studied and is split between the rail
and bus categories depending on its right-of-way.25
    The components of public-transport accessibility to jobs are explored here
through multiple regression models with work accessibility by public trans-
port as the outcome of interest. Data for these analyses come from the Uni-
versity of Minnesota Accessibility Observatory, the National Transit Database,
the National Historical Geographic Information System, and LEHD Origin-
Destination Employment Statistics.26 The dependent variable for these analyses
is a population-weighted metropolitan job accessibility score.27
    Public-transport accessibility is modeled on the basis of independent variables
that include the total population in a metropolitan area (as a control variable),
VRM per capita for rail and bus modes, residential density (measured as a share
of the regional population living in densities higher than sixty persons per gross
acre), a Fit Index that assesses the degree to which the regional land-use pat-
tern corresponds to the public-transport accessibility provided (as a correlation
between block-level thirty-minute public-transport accessibility and block-level
gross population density), and a Gini Index that measures the evenness of the
distribution of public-transport accessibility across the regional population.28
    The evenness of the distribution of public-transport accessibility across the
regional population, as measured by the Gini Index, can affect average accessibil-
ity in two ways, with opposing directions of effects. First, concentrating public-
transport resources in the highest-density and most central territory may pay off
well for residents of these districts. In principle, this outcome could be enough
to raise average per-capita public-transport accessibility overall. Second, spread-
ing transit resources broadly both increases the transit accessibility of people
94        CHAPTER 5


in more outlying locations and increases the ability of centrally located people
to reach those distant locations by transit. If the second effect dominates, then
the prescription of fitting public transport to its region by spreading it around
to residents outside the urban core makes good sense from an accessibility per-
spective. Note, however, that deployment policies to increase public-transport
accessibility for the average metro resident may differ from those to promote
social equity or those to maximize ridership, which may be increased by focusing
public-transport resources on the most transit-friendly corridors in the region
(see chapter 6).


Effects of Public-Transport Deployment,
Land Use, and Fit on Accessibility
Regression models were estimated to assess the relative importance of several
independent variables on the dependent variable of public-transport accessibil-
ity (table 5.1). The metropolitan areas in these models include regions whose
public-transport accessibility has been strongly shaped by public-transport
investments from the first half of the twentieth century.29 Thus, to represent
more closely the transit-investment decisions that metropolitan areas face in the
current era, models were also constructed that exclude metropolitan areas with
legacy heavy-rail systems, defined as heavy-rail systems (except for commuter
rail) from before 1972 (these are shown in table 5.1 as Models B and D). This
excluded from the analysis metropolitan New York, Boston, Chicago, Philadel-
phia, and Cleveland.
   Two regression models use average weighted public-transport job accessibility
as the dependent variable (shown as A and B in table 5.1). One way to think of
these is to consider the individual enjoying the average level of public-transport
accessibility in the region. Since public-transport accessibility tends to decrease
from the metropolitan center to the periphery, this person is likely a suburban
dweller somewhere between the metropolitan edge and the municipal bound-
ary of the central city. These two models indicate a strong relationship between
public-transport accessibility and the service provided by rail and bus modes.
Unsurprisingly, public-transport accessibility depends on public-transport
deployment; in combination, the two public-transport service variables are the
greatest explanatory factors in these models, followed by residential density vari-
able and land-use/transit-service fit.
   Rail has a stronger influence on public-transport accessibility than bus. Rail
modes contribute between 49 percent and 96 percent more than bus modes per
vehicle-mile of service to the average job accessibility by public transport in a
region. The difference between the share of accessibility explained by rail and bus
                                 THE SPECIAL CASE OF PUBLIC-TRANSPORT ACCESSIBILITY                        95


Table 5.1 Influence of public-transport service and land use on public-transport
accessibility
DEPENDENT              TIME-WEIGHTED JOB ACCESSIBILITY VIA              85TH-PERCENTILE 30-MINUTE JOB
VARIABLE                            TRANSIT                               ACCESSIBILITY VIA TRANSIT

      MODEL                  A                      B                       C                      D
    ANALYSIS SET      ALL METROS          ALL METROS EXCEPT          ALL METROS          ALL METROS EXCEPT
                    EXCEPT NEW YORK       LEGACY RAIL METROS       EXCEPT NEW YORK       LEGACY RAIL METROS


Rail VRM per            0.39 ***               0.35 ***                 0.18 *                  0.19 *
    capita            (.0425; 5.58)          (.0465; 4.57)          (.0698; 1.86)           (.0710; 2.03)
Bus VRM per             0.20 ***               0.23 ***                 0.14 **                  0.09
    capita            (.0210; 4.39)          (.0221; 4.19)          (.0345; 2.21)           (.0337; 1.36)
Percent in high         0.37 ***               0.40 ***                0.70 ***                0.69 **
    density           (.1342; 4.40)          (.1631; 4.41)          (.2201; 6.13)           (.2491; 6.19)
Population              0.20 ***                0.18 **                  –0.04                  –0.02
                      (.0357; 3.55)          (.0399; 2.73)          (.0585; –0.55)         (.0609; –0.22)
Gini Index                –0.04                  –0.05                 –0.14 **               –0.12 **
                     (.0176; –1.15)         (.0180; –1.05)          (.0288; –2.68)         (.0274; –2.24)
Fit Index                0.09 **                 0.09 *                 0.16 **               0.21 ***
                      (.0207; 2.13)          (.0214; 1.85)          (.0340; 2.69)           (.0327; 3.37)
Intercept            (.0219; –0.33)          (.0271; 0.48)          (.0359; 2.25)           (.0415; 3.44)
Adj. R2                  0.9383                  0.9224                 0.8826                 0.8854
N                           45                     41                      45                     41

Notes: Values are standardized beta-weight coefficients. Values in parentheses are standardized standard errors
and t-statistics. Statistical significance: *p < 0.1; **p < 0.05; ***p < 0.01.




systems would be a function of both the speed differences between the two tech-
nologies and their association with land use. For example, if rail is associated with
greater job-housing proximity or clustering of land uses, its accessibility impact
would incorporate this. This land-use effect may explain in part why the bus-rail
gap is larger in the rail-legacy metropolitan areas than in the non-rail-legacy
regions. Having grown up around their rail systems, the rail-legacy metropolitan
areas have had many more decades for their physical development patterns to
respond to rail accessibility than the regions without historic rail investment. To
the extent that rail deployment is positively associated with higher spending on
buses, the contribution of rail modes to job accessibility may be even larger than
what is found here.30
    The correspondence between land use and public-transport service (as shown
by the Fit Index) also contributes to the benefits provided by public-transport
service and residential density. This suggests that there are regional accessibil-
ity benefits to coordinating land-use patterns and public-transport investments
through efforts such as transit-oriented development and in general permitting
96         CHAPTER 5


denser development in areas of high public-transport accessibility. A broad dis-
tribution of public-transport service, as indicated by a lower Gini Index, is weakly
associated with higher average public-transport accessibility, an expected result
(though not statistically significant), since a higher Gini Index represents a less
even distribution of public-transport services in the region. This suggests that as
public-transport service coverage is spread more evenly across the population,
average regional job accessibility increases.
    The discussion of the two models (A and B in table 5.1) pertains to average
job accessibility via public transport as the relevant outcome. Seeking to boost
average accessibility is, however, only one possible transit-accessibility outcome.
It may be, by contrast, that high-quality public transport at the upper end of the
accessibility distribution is what matters. For example, planners and policy mak-
ers may be motivated to focus on the high end of the transit-accessibility distri-
bution to promote the possibility of car-free lifestyles, or to improve conditions
for low-income residents at the center of a region. In any case, a shift of focus to
the high end of the transit-accessibility distribution implies greater attention to
the center of the metropolitan area than to the suburbs.
    Two additional models incorporate this idea by shifting the dependent vari-
able to the 85th percentile of accessibility (shown as C and D in table 5.1).31 When
the focus is on this high end of accessibility in the region, rather than the mean,
the explanatory power of both rail and bus service is relatively less influential,
while the relative importance of residential density and land-use/public-transport
fit is greater. Rail and bus are nearly equivalent in the model including legacy
metropolitan areas, perhaps as a result of the relatively central location of the
85th-percentile individual in dense-core regions. By contrast, rail is much more
important than bus in nonlegacy regions for improving 85th-percentile accessibility.
    The geographic spread of public transport, as measured by the Gini Index,
plays an important role in explaining this higher end of public-transport acces-
sibility. In metropolitan areas where public-transport accessibility is distributed
more broadly across the population, 85th-percentile public-transport accessibil-
ity increases. Whereas a broad distribution of public-transport accessibility may
boost the accessibility of both the average and the 85th-percentile resident, the
increase is substantially greater for the high end of accessibility.32 Public-transport
accessibility tends to be very spatially concentrated, and a broader spread, in
many cases, means a particular boost for residents around the 85th percentile.
In addition, a broader geographic spread implies growing public-transport acces-
sibility overall because of the ability of people with transit-system access to reach
more destinations. Given their relatively central location, the 85th-percentile
residents are well-positioned to benefit from a public-transport system with
expanded geographic reach.
                        THE SPECIAL CASE OF PUBLIC-TRANSPORT ACCESSIBILITY          97


    The explanatory power of residential density increases with the shift from
average-accessibility to 85th-percentile-accessibility models. High densities increase
public-transport accessibility by improving proximity to destinations as well as by
making it easier to serve the urban population efficiently with public-transport
service. By contrast, the population variable becomes less influential in the 85th-
percentile models. This may be a product of the definition of public-transport
accessibility based on a thirty-minute commute time, on which these models rely.
Public-transport travel of thirty minutes from central locations would still be
within the metropolitan core for most large regions in the United States; hence
the size of the metro is less important than the extent of public-transport ser-
vice provided. At the same time, proximity is more important for a thirty-minute
threshold, and that is presumably captured via the residential density variable.
    Land-use/transit-service fit increases in importance moving from the average
to the 85th percentile, and it has as large an influence as either rail or bus service.
This highlights the importance of integrating transportation and land-use policy
to improve public-transport accessibility for urban residents.



From Accessibility Measurement to
Public-Transport Resource Allocation
While debates over public-transport policy are frequently framed in bus-versus-
rail terms, one point emerges from our analysis: public-transport accessibility
depends on investment in either technology. Metropolitan regions such as Kansas
City, Phoenix, and Detroit that fail to deploy much public-transport service in
either their bus or rail variants will rank poorly in public-transport-accessibility
terms. In this sense, the threat to public-transport accessibility is much less the
danger of making the wrong choice of public-transport technology than the
unwillingness of electorates (or their representatives) to spend much money
on public transport in general. And the political orientation of the electorate is
among the strongest predictors of public-transport spending per capita.33
   In bus-versus-rail terms, all else being equal, a mile of rail service is associated
with an average accessibility benefit that is between 49 percent and 96 percent
higher than that produced by a mile of bus service. While this finding may be
interpreted as favorable to rail deployment, it is hardly the end of the story. The
decision to invest in a certain public-transport technology depends not only on
the benefits it is expected to generate but also on the costs associated with its
construction and operation.
   From a narrow cost-benefit point of view, if rail is to be preferred over bus,
rail costs must not be more than 96 percent higher than bus costs. When taking
98         CHAPTER 5


both capital and operating costs into account, this condition does not hold, since
the capital costs of rail are much higher than buses in mixed traffic. The U.S.
Government Accounting Office estimated per-mile LRT capital costs to be fifty
times those of buses on arterials.34 Buses in mixed traffic share the cost of the
bulk of the infrastructure with cars and trucks; even with the fair share of these
costs attributed to the buses, the capital costs cannot be close to the same range as
those associated with rail transit. Moreover, capital-cost differences are not likely
to be compensated for by operating-cost savings. One meta-analysis put LRT at
three times the operating cost of bus per vehicle revenue mile (though because
of high occupancies, LRT showed slightly lower operating costs per passenger
mile).35 With the rail-bus cost gap much greater than the accessibility differences,
the analysis presented here would appear to support greater reliance on buses in
providing regional public-transport accessibility on a cost-benefit basis.
    The criterion of accessibility generated per money spent is probably too nar-
row a guide for transit-service planning, however. First, a rail vehicle-revenue mile
transports more passengers than a bus vehicle-revenue mile; in the thirty-nine
metropolitan areas with rail included in this study, median vehicle occupancy in
fixed-guideway modes (22.7) was about triple that of vehicle occupancy in non-
fixed-guideway modes (7.5).36 Thus, higher occupancies partly compensate for
the higher costs of rail. Buses in mixed traffic generally travel at slower speeds
than cars along the same route; for this reason, they rarely provide a motive for
people with access to autos to choose the public-transport option. Corridors
with high bus occupancy can increase the person throughput of their facilities
through designation of a dedicated guideway; a BRT lane has a carrying capacity
of 5,000–45,000 passengers per hour.37 Given a high enough volume of public-
transport passengers, this compares very favorably with the maximum through-
put for mixed traffic: 1,900 vehicles per lane per hour of green for signalized
intersections.38 Public-transport planners who seek to provide high-passenger-
volume corridors and to increase public transport’s attractive capacity, as com-
pared to the private car, may advocate for increased reliance on fixed-guideway
systems, including BRT and rail.
    Moreover, the net effect of a decision to opt for expensive rail transit on public-
transport accessibility would need to be assessed in light of the political pro-
cesses by which revenue for public-transport investments is raised. If spending
on fixed-guideway transit reduces spending on bus transit, the decision to allo-
cate resources to LRT (or even BRT) could reduce accessibility. Those resources,
if spent on adding ordinary bus services, might augment public-transport acces-
sibility more. But in practice, areas that spend more money on rail end up spend-
ing more money on bus.39 Allocation between bus and rail spending thus does not
amount to a zero-sum game; it may be that rail spending supports the creation
                       THE SPECIAL CASE OF PUBLIC-TRANSPORT ACCESSIBILITY          99


of both transit-friendly areas and transit-friendly constituencies. In this environ-
ment, the substantial accessibility advantage offered by fixed-guideway public-
transport service over bus service may help explain rail’s continued appeal.
    Yet resource-allocation decisions in either bus or rail remain only part of
the transit-accessibility story. While public-transport investment is central to
public-transport accessibility, the results presented here suggest that accessibility
can in many cases be degraded through poor land-use planning. Limiting resi-
dential concentrations in areas that are well-served by existing public-transport
service—a common move driven by mobilized local constituencies—can reduce
public-transport accessibility to jobs for the average metropolitan resident as
well as for the central-city resident.40 In fact, for centrally located residents, the
variation in the public-transport accessibility provided is explained to a greater
degree by residential density and land-use/transit fit than by the extent of public-
transport service. In an era of resource constraints, land-use regulatory reform
to relax density restrictions in areas of high public-transport accessibility may be
the most promising approach to boosting public-transport accessibility.



Making the Shift to Accessibility-Based
Planning for Public Transport
Public transport differs from other modes when it comes to accessibility. Like its
counterpart modes, public transport provides mobility that can contribute to
accessibility. But in ways distinct from other modes, public transport can exert
a stronger influence on proximity to improve accessibility. Spatial and temporal
characteristics of the public-transport mode impose special challenges on plan-
ners and policy makers who aim to make the shift to accessibility-based evalua-
tion in public transport. Although choosing to take a simple approach to address
these technical challenges may sacrifice some accuracy in estimating, the pay-
off can nevertheless be substantial if accessibility measurements lead to policy
insights not discoverable through mobility-based evaluation alone.
    The accessibility shift requires that accessibility become the core rubric
by which public transport is planned and evaluated. The multiregion empiri-
cal study presented here provides an example of the different perspective on
public-transport decisions afforded by the accessibility shift. When increasing
public-transport accessibility is the goal, large regions have good reason to
increase transit deployment, though the choice between rail and bus technolo-
gies is a complex one based on the interplay among accessibility impacts and local
financial and political trade-offs. Coordinating land-use development along with
public-transport investments—through transit-oriented development or easing
100         CHAPTER 5


of low-density zoning restrictions, for example—leads to regional accessibility
benefits. Distributing public-transport service broadly and evenly throughout a
region brings benefits even to residents at the center of the region by providing
them with an expanded geographic reach.
   Single-region evaluations of transit accessibility can be brought even closer
to decision points than the multiregion evaluation. A public-transport operator
with good accessibility models can use them to test the impact of potential ser-
vice changes, such as relocations of bus routes or increases in frequency, on the
overall level and equity of distribution of transit accessibility. Accessibility-based
analyses like these can be used to shape public debate and inform decision mak-
ers about which combination of transport and land-use arrangements best helps
a region’s public-transport riders reach their destinations.
                                                                        6
ACCESSIBILITY IN SOCIAL-EQUITY
EVALUATION




A long-standing challenge for transportation planners is the search for a fair
distribution of the costs and benefits of a transportation system. Gauging trans-
portation equity involves a range of dimensions, including exposure to nega-
tive consequences like noise and air pollution, distributions of monetary and
other costs, tax and subsidy incidence, and disparities in safety outcomes.1 These
dimensions are costs borne disproportionately across populations, and they are
apart from transportation service itself. In conducting equity analyses, planners
typically rely on mobility-based tools, which address the distribution of costs
alone. By contrast, the accessibility shift can support equity analysis based on
the distribution of benefits from transportation service in the form of the abil-
ity to reach destinations. The accessibility shift, in and of itself, neither produces
equitable outcomes nor inherently defines what would count as transporta-
tion fairness. But it offers planners a crucial capability, based on the simulta-
neous consideration of travel mode and geographic location, to evaluate how
the benefits from transportation service are distributed among people; standard
mobility-based metrics cannot do this.
    In this chapter, we argue that because the concept of accessibility enables
comparison of transportation’s benefits among social groups, it is essential
to proper evaluation of the social-equity impacts of transportation decisions.
Unlike mobility metrics, which tend to focus on the performance of infrastruc-
ture, accessibility metrics are readily analyzed with regard to specific groups


                                                                        101
102        CHAPTER 6


of people, such as low-income and racial-minority groups. One group that
deserves special attention in equity analysis is people without access to an auto-
mobile, because the travel modes available to individuals are the single most
decisive factor in determining whether they can reach destinations. But because
accessibility is inherently multidimensional and more complex than standard
mobility-based metrics, several methodological considerations are essential for
meaningful analysis; considering differences in mode alone is not sufficient. The
influence of mode on accessibility tends to vary systematically in metropolitan
space, and accessibility analysis must consider the effect of mode and location
simultaneously. We will first explain the mobility nature of current equity evalu-
ation, and then propose and demonstrate the use of accessibility-based equity-
evaluation tools.



Problems with Mobility-Based Equity Evaluation
When planners rely on mobility-based measures of transportation outcomes
they face three problems for evaluating the distributional impacts of transporta-
tion decisions. First, mobility-based measures such as levels of congestion are
attributes of transportation links and not of people. Consequently, all users of
a roadway are treated as if they have the same level of mobility, a fact that hides
variations in people’s ability to reach their destinations. Moreover, such mea-
sures ignore households without cars, the people who are most disadvantaged by
transportation conditions today.
    Second, achieving congestion relief through added highway capacity may
undermine accessibility by causing a spread of origins and destinations.2 Travel
to increasingly remote shopping or work destinations might be accomplished at
higher speeds, but the geographic spread of these destinations demands yet more
travel to achieve the same level of interaction. Thus, transportation policy may
disproportionately harm racial minorities and low-income people who live near
the urban core and have few resources to adapt to spreading land-use patterns.3
    Finally, mobility-based metrics fail to capture the benefits of a transporta-
tion system, even when they are used to gauge the disadvantage that some social
groups experience through their travel behavior. Equity evaluations commonly
compare groups on mobility metrics such as kilometers traveled per day, trips
per day, and minutes traveled per day.4 The problem with such metrics is that it
is not clear whether greater movement constitutes an advantage or disadvantage.
All else being equal, one would prefer a shorter travel time to a longer one. How-
ever, a preference for shorter travel time does not mean that those with longer
travel times are somehow disadvantaged. In fact, social groups that are widely
                                 ACCESSIBILITY IN SOCIAL-EQUITY EVALUATION        103


considered to be disadvantaged in transportation, such as women and poor peo-
ple, demonstrate much shorter travel times than the general population mainly
because they have fewer choices.5 By contrast, most of the middle- and upper-
income classes of the United States can choose to trade off longer commutes in
exchange for the amenities that come with living in the suburbs, and the longer
travel times or distances they experience would not properly be considered a
transportation disadvantage.



Equity Analysis in Professional Practice
Supporting equity in transportation is more than a moral or professional obliga-
tion; it is also mandated by a series of laws and regulations in countries, includ-
ing the United States, that require ongoing and active monitoring by the public
agencies charged with transportation planning. Yet, despite these mandates, pub-
lic agencies charged with providing transportation infrastructure and services
struggle with the task of evaluating whether their decisions comply with equity
objectives.6 The conceptual difficulty of evaluating equity has resulted princi-
pally from reliance on mobility-based metrics; many of these challenges can be
overcome with a shift to an accessibility framework.


The Challenge of Meeting Equity Mandates
In the United Kingdom, a national goal of reducing social exclusion became a
top public policy objective in the 1990s and prompted government officials to
advance efforts to address inequality in the transport sector.7 Recognizing the
inequitable distribution of opportunities to participate fully in societal activities,
policy makers and researchers promoted changes in the provision of transport as
an important factor in enabling people to undertake a wider range of activities
in daily life. The UK Social Exclusion Unit published a widely recognized report
in 2003—which influenced practitioners and scholars in several countries, most
notably the Netherlands and Australia—about the importance of addressing the
role of transport through a framework of overcoming social exclusion.8 In 2006
transport authorities in England at the local level of governance were charged
by statutory requirement to identify solutions to the problem of individuals
and communities experiencing low accessibility to essential destinations.9 Even
though a change in national government and economic austerity measures lim-
ited the capacity of local authorities to implement solutions, Karen Lucas con-
cludes that “the concept of transport-related social exclusion now has significant
resonance with the transport research and policy community internationally.”10
104         CHAPTER 6


    In the United States, state and local agencies are legally required to avoid dis-
crimination in their plans and programs. This mandate has its roots in a series
of laws including Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the National Environ-
mental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA), and several Federal-Aid Highway Acts of the
1970s.11 Partly in response to the growing environmental-justice movement and
the need for public agencies to play a more assertive role, the Clinton administra-
tion in 1994 substantially elevated attention to social equity when it issued Execu-
tive Order 12898 (Federal Actions to Address Environmental Justice in Minority
Populations and Low-Income Populations). The executive order, which remains
in effect as of this writing, directed all federal agencies to develop a strategy that
“identifies and addresses disproportionately high and adverse human health or
environmental effects of its programs, policies, and activities on minority popu-
lations and low-income populations.”
    Despite the growing awareness of inequities in the transport sector and the
demands on governments to address them, public agencies often find these
requirements challenging to implement due to a mix of technical and politi-
cal considerations. In the United States, guidelines are vague and the require-
ments rarely enforced, which commonly results in highly incomplete analyses.12
Frequently, legislation and regulations fail to specify evaluation techniques to
ensure that the principles outlined in the various environmental-justice goals
are met, and planners and decision makers have expressed the need for such
technical tools.13 Similarly, prior to the United Kingdom’s mandate to carry out
accessibility planning to address social exclusion, local authorities gave equity
analysis little priority or relied on overly technical analyses that failed to yield
policy change.14


Mobility-Based Equity Analysis in Professional
Practice of the United States
Equity analysis in professional practice remains rooted in mobility thinking in
the United States. The most specific guidance on carrying out equity analysis has
come from the Federal Transit Administration (FTA), providing instructions for
all recipients of financial assistance from the FTA, including state departments
of transportation, metropolitan planning organizations (MPOs), and public-
transit agencies.15 Recipients of federal funding must certify their compliance
with civil rights law. They must have a planning process, according to FTA guide-
lines, that “identifies the needs of low-income and minority populations” as well
as an “analytical process that identifies the benefits and burdens of metropolitan
transportation system investments for different socioeconomic groups, identify-
ing imbalances and responding to the analyses produced.”16
                                ACCESSIBILITY IN SOCIAL-EQUITY EVALUATION        105


    In the case of public transport, agencies are required to maintain system-wide
service standards and to perform an equity analysis of proposed changes in ser-
vice or fares, including alterations to routes or schedules and the elimination of
bus lines or stops. If an agency finds disparities, it is required to take corrective
action. The recommended approach for demonstrating compliance is to create
maps showing the proximity of minority and low-income population groups
to bus and rail stations. Yet proximity to a transit stop is merely an indicator of
access to the public-transport system and not a measure of accessibility to des-
tinations (see chapter 5). Under the recommended approach, service levels are
to be evaluated on a range of metrics including vehicle loads (e.g., passengers
per vehicle), headways (the frequency of service as the time interval between
vehicles arriving at a stop), on-time performance, and availability of amenities
(e.g., benches, shelters, trash receptacles). Service metrics like these gauge impor-
tant dimensions for agencies to consider, but they are ultimately mobility based
because they can only assess disparities in how well vehicles are moving or how
people are experiencing the transportation system. They do not address dispari-
ties in how well public transport is meeting its ultimate purpose of connecting
riders with their destinations.
    In the case of regional planning agencies, the most common type of equity
analysis is conducted by MPOs to certify that their regional plans comply with
civil rights law. The FTA’s widely used approach first identifies geographic con-
centrations of population groups including, at a minimum, racial-minority and
low-income residents of the region.17 Typically, two groups are defined so that
their metrics can be compared. One group is often termed the “EJ (Environ-
mental Justice) population” (e.g., a minority or low-income population, which
is sometimes called a “protected population” or a “target population”). The EJ
population is then compared to a control population (e.g., a nonminority or
non-low-income population).18
    This type of analysis defines a set of metrics, typically mobility based, with
which to evaluate the benefits and burdens of the regional transportation plan.
In some cases, MPOs use mobility metrics alone, without any acknowledgment
of accessibility. An example is from the Mid-America Regional Council, which
serves the Kansas City, Missouri, metropolitan area.19 Examples of mobility-
based metrics used in the analysis include the number of trips taken by auto and
transit, walk time to a transit stop, and hours of transit service provided. After
comparing these and other metrics between the population groups, the report
finds that the proposed regional plan will have no disproportionately high or
adverse impacts on the protected populations.
    Environmental-justice analyses have started to use some accessibility met-
rics, typically as a complement to mobility-based analyses.20 Several MPOs
106        CHAPTER 6


exemplify the use of accessibility metrics in equity analysis, including the Boston
Region Metropolitan Planning Organization, the Metropolitan Transportation
Commission of the San Francisco Bay Area, the Mid-Ohio Regional Planning
Commission of Columbus, and the Southern California Association of Govern-
ments.21 Yet the accessibility metrics appearing in these MPOs’ equity analyses
remain merely supplements to a mix of mobility-based metrics.22
   The Mid-Ohio Regional Planning Commission of Columbus, Ohio, pro-
vides an example of an extensive and thorough environmental-justice analysis
that acknowledges the importance of accessibility but also relies heavily on
mobility-based metrics. To illustrate how a mobility-based metric is assessed
in the plan, the analysis includes a chart comparing a 2035 “no build” sce-
nario to a 2035 scenario of plan implementation, and it shows that the share of
congested vehicle-miles of travel is expected to be higher for the target disad-
vantaged population relative to the nontarget population in both scenarios.23
Such a finding is not surprising, because the target population is located at
the core of the region, precisely where traffic congestion is typically highest.
But the finding that one group would experience more congestion on aver-
age than the other group offers little insight into the question of which group
experiences disadvantage. It may be that higher levels of congestion are offset
by higher levels of accessibility. But the relevant equity question is multidi-
mensional and more complex than even measurement of the accessibility of
different zones. For example, centrally located territory may be more accessible
than the metropolitan periphery by either auto or public transport, but its
residents may experience low accessibility because of their low car-ownership
rates. Similarly, the distribution of public-transport accessibility may match
the location of transit-dependent people well, or there may be systematic dis-
junctures between the two.



Advancing Equity Analysis with an
Accessibility Perspective
While mobility-based metrics leave uncertainty about whether social groups
experience disadvantage relative to others, accessibility metrics provide a logical
starting point for equity analysis.24 While arguing for the normative dimension
of accessibility, Martin Wachs and Gordon Kumagai advocated for the relevance
of such analysis to the equity-based assessment of conditions among social
groups.25 In fact, some scholars have argued that accessibility is the appropri-
ate good to be considered in questions of just distributions of transportation
benefits.26
                                ACCESSIBILITY IN SOCIAL-EQUITY EVALUATION        107


   Scholars using accessibility in social-equity analysis have made important
advances in at least two respects.27 First, they take a normative stance on distribu-
tive justice based on the distinction between “horizontal” and “vertical” equity.28
These studies start from the observation that horizontal equity, under which
members of any one group, such as poor people or car owners, are expected to
experience identical benefits, is all but impossible because of the spatial nature
of accessibility. Attributes of places within metropolitan space, such as residential
density, demographics, destinations, and proximity to the center, vary so sub-
stantially that any location-based benefits such as accessibility are unavoidably
unequal. Designing transportation services in a way that achieves identical levels
of accessibility for everyone is insuperably difficult in this respect. But deliver-
ing identical levels of accessibility for everyone through transportation may not
be desirable even if it were possible to achieve. The concept of vertical equity
expresses a normative approach to deliberately distributing benefits unequally
among population groups according to principles such as accommodating pref-
erences, considering who has the ability to bear costs, or meeting needs. These
studies take the view that transportation benefits ought to accrue to some groups
more than to others in order to meet needs or address preexisting disadvan-
tages.29 Clearly, how public officials define social groups and decide which prin-
ciples to follow are not merely technical decisions but value-laden ones.
   The second main advance in studies of accessibility and equity is an under-
standing of the need to establish principles to guide analysis in practice. Even if
transportation professionals have started to accept the concept of accessibility as
a viable equity indicator, there remain wide variations in how it might be mea-
sured and evaluated.30 For example, no standards govern the equity analyses that
are mandated by federal regulations in the United States.31 Karel Martens pro-
posed principles to “assist decision-makers in the selection of transport projects
that maximize average accessibility levels, while ensuring that the accessibility
gaps between population groups remain within an acceptable range.”32 These
principles properly identify the goal of increasing accessibility as the main objec-
tive of transportation planning, and they aim to make sure that disadvantaged
populations are not harmed by constraining the range between the best-off and
worst-off in terms of accessibility.
   One manifestation of these principles is in the call for minimizing the gap
between auto and public-transport accessibility.33 The goal of minimizing the
difference between transit and auto accessibility stems from the car’s status as
the yardstick for a base level of transportation convenience in an auto-oriented
society:34 Karel Martens, Aaron Golub, and Glenn Robinson contend that using
the transit-auto accessibility gap should be a key indicator: “Ideally, transport
investment programs should guarantee that: (1) the gap between the areas or
108         CHAPTER 6


neighborhoods with the lowest and the highest level of access should remain
within a predefined range . . . ; (2) the gap between car-owning and car-less
households residing in the same area or neighborhood should remain within a
predefined range . . . ; while (3) aiming to achieve the highest possible average
access level across all neighborhoods and mode-related groups.”35
    Minimizing the gap between public transport access and auto access is advo-
cated out of concern for several disadvantaged groups: those who cannot afford
to own a car, those who cannot drive for physical or other reasons, and those who
are too old or too young to drive but still want to participate in activities. Propos-
ing to minimize the gap between auto and transit accessibility is sensible to the
extent that it aims to address the needs of the most disadvantaged, and because
it appropriately recognizes that relative deprivation is an important element in
social justice. People may be disadvantaged not just in an absolute sense, but also
in comparison to a societal norm.
    Yet the principles of providing preferential treatment for certain groups like
transit-dependent people and seeking to minimize the gap between auto and
public-transport accessibility in any given area or neighborhood, are likely to be
at odds with one another. This is because of two intersecting phenomena: public-
transport users are highly unequally distributed from area to area, and the cost
of providing transit access varies markedly from central to peripheral areas. For
example, allocating a given budget so as to minimize transit-auto accessibility
gaps for all areas would lead to an entirely different spending pattern from an allo-
cation oriented to maximizing the accessibility of transit-dependent people. The
latter principle would demand focusing investment in areas where individuals
without access to cars reside. In many instances, those are also the higher-density,
central locations that are served most economically by public transportation
in any case. Thus, promoting the accessibility of people without cars will often
require a targeting of public-transport resources that leaves some areas with large
gaps between transit and auto accessibility. A focus on the gap between transit
and auto accessibility across the region as a fairness indicator amounts to a defi-
nition of equity based on territory. By contrast, we will offer approaches that aim
to focus on accessibility through explicit accounting for the residential locations
of people with and without access to cars.



Accessibility Analysis by Mode,
Location, and People
Costs and benefits of transportation infrastructure and services vary across met-
ropolitan space, individuals, and households. In the case of U.S. metropolitan
                                 ACCESSIBILITY IN SOCIAL-EQUITY EVALUATION        109


regions, nearly all people without cars experience a substantial accessibility dis-
advantage relative to their car-owning counterparts. Planners seeking to target
transit resources where needs are greatest must simultaneously consider the
effects of mode, location, and people when assessing the distribution of acces-
sibility benefits.


How Accessibility Varies by Mode and Location
The magnitude of the gap between auto and public-transport accessibility is strik-
ing in nearly every metropolitan region of the United States, and the disparity
between the modes varies systematically within metropolitan space. For example,
even Washington, DC, a metropolitan area that has an unusually strong commit-
ment to public transport, demonstrates a substantial gap between travel modes.
Figure 6.1 compares the regional accessibility of Washington, DC, to Detroit
by auto and transit, and highlights several observations about the importance
of analyzing accessibility by mode and location simultaneously. First, both auto
and public-transport accessibility show generally similar patterns: the values are
highest near the central business district (CBD) and then taper off to become
lowest at the periphery of the region. Second, transit accessibility is low even in
the CBD, where public-transport service is most prevalent, in comparison to auto
accessibility at the same location. Third, transit accessibility is low throughout the
majority of metropolitan space. In Washington, DC, public-transport accessibility
drops steeply within about eight kilometers of the CBD and becomes close to zero
after about twenty kilometers. The difference between the best location for public
transport (0 km) and the worst (100 km) is small and represents just a fraction of
the full range between the best and worst locations for auto.
   While people with access to cars have a significant accessibility advantage
virtually everywhere in U.S. metropolitan regions, the extent of that advantage
varies with the type of region and the public transport investment it has made.
For example, in contrast to transit-rich Washington, DC, the Detroit metropoli-
tan region is well known for poor public transport service (figure 6.1).36 Detroit
exhibits patterns of accessibility that are more similar to those of other U.S. met-
ropolitan regions than to those of Washington, DC. All the observations noted
for Washington, DC, hold for Detroit, but the difference between auto and transit
accessibility is more extreme in Detroit. Furthermore, the Detroit case makes
clear another contrast between auto and public-transport accessibility that gen-
erally holds for most U.S. regions. Accessibility by auto is substantially better
than accessibility by public transport nearly everywhere. Car drivers as distant
as seventy-five kilometers from the CBD enjoy higher levels of auto accessibility
than transit riders located at the CBD where transit accessibility is highest.
110          CHAPTER 6



600000



500000



400000



300000

                            Auto-Detroit

200000
                       Auto-WDC

100000

                  Transit-WDC

      0   Transit-Detroit

            0               20             40     60            80   100    120
                                       Distance from CBD (km)

FIGURE 6.1. Comparing automobile with transit accessibility to work, by
distance from the central business district (km), Washington, DC, and Detroit
MPO regions, 2005



    These charts illustrate what Evelyn Blumenberg and Michael Manville refer to
as the “modal mismatch, a drastic divergence in the relative advantage between
those who have access to automobiles and those who do not.”37 The severe differ-
ence between auto and public-transport accessibility in U.S. metropolitan areas
is the defining feature of transportation disadvantage. Any policy that aims to
address social equity in transportation must confront the conditions of transit-
dependent people. Policy interventions such as strengthening public transport,
subsidizing auto ownership for poor people, and fostering alternatives to car
ownership through car-sharing or bike-sharing programs are examples of steps
that would elevate the accessibility of transit-dependent people.38
    Effectively promoting social equity in transportation requires tools to help
decision-makers choose where to invest the next increment of transportation
funds, and policies to guide investments without explicit attention to where
and at whom the investments are aimed can foster perverse outcomes. For
example, in Detroit, planners seeking to minimize the gap between auto and
                                 ACCESSIBILITY IN SOCIAL-EQUITY EVALUATION        111


public-transport accessibility in each neighborhood would be obligated to invest
in transit at locations that are some thirty kilometers from the CBD (figure 6.1).
While spreading transit service broadly can increase accessibility at the metro-
politan center (see chapter 5), the effect would depend on the destinations served
by suburban extensions. Where these serve mostly residential zones, they would
only have a slight effect on the accessibility of central-city residents; by contrast,
where they serve concentrations of work or nonwork destinations, they can be
a significant accessibility boost. For this reason, tools are needed to ensure that
resource allocation benefits the people who rely on public transport, including
those who live at the metropolitan center.
    Transit-resource allocations that appear to fail at that goal have led to con-
cerns that investments aimed at “choice” riders in the suburbs are harming
“transit-dependent” riders at the urban core.39 Prioritization of public transport
away from the urban core in U.S. cities in favor of suburban jurisdictions has
triggered a wide array of legal challenges based on the claim that such fund-
ing favors predominantly white and relatively affluent populations over racial
minorities and the poor.40 If steps to consider social equity are to address the
severe differences between auto and transit accessibility, then guiding principles
must account for transit-dependent people and the locations where they live.


Analyzing Mode and Location by Social Groups
Without more information, figure 6.1, which pertains to mode and location
simultaneously, reveals little about people, notably people who depend on public
transport. Transit-dependent people are not evenly distributed in metropolitan
space but, in the case of the United States, are typically concentrated near the met-
ropolitan core, precisely where public-transport accessibility tends to be high.41
   Regardless of the level of public-transport accessibility provided in a region,
carless people can increase their accessibility by locating in zones of higher transit
accessibility. Ideally, the modal disadvantage of the transit-dependent population
would be at least partly compensated by their locational advantage if they resided
in zones of exceptionally high public-transport accessibility. By contrast, transit-
dependent people who live in low-transit-accessibility zones are disadvantaged
by both mode and location.
   For this reason, one indicator of transportation equity is the extent to which
transit-dependent people live in transit-rich areas. A spatial match in this dimen-
sion can result from focusing public-transport investments in areas of public-
transport dependence, from the location of transit-dependent individuals in
transit-rich areas, from people’s choice to forego car ownership in transit-rich
zones, or from any combination of the three. Land-use policy can be important
   112                                                              CHAPTER 6


   in this regard. A region that allows for increases in supplies of affordable housing
   in transit-rich areas will tend to demonstrate a better match than one that zones
   in a more exclusionary fashion.
       To illustrate the variation among metropolitan areas in terms of the degree
   to which transit-dependent people live in transit-rich territory, figure 6.2 charts
   the share of transit-dependent households in a region according to their resi-
   dence by public-transport accessibility quartiles, with quartiles defined internally
   to each metropolitan area.42 Regions that perform best in the match between
   transit-dependent households and territory of high public-transport accessibility
   include Kansas City, New York, and San Francisco. By contrast, places like Houston,
   Los Angeles, and Cleveland perform less well because a substantially smaller share
   of transit-dependent households resides in zones of the highest transit-accessibility
   quartile. An indicator like this could focus policy-making attention on the location


                                                Level of accessibility
                                   100




Percentage of households with no vehicle
                                           80



                                           60



                                           40



                                           20



                                            0

                                                                                              Atlanta                                                                                                                                Tucson                        Phoenix
                                                                                                                                              Seattle                                                                                         Charlotte


                                                                              Washington DC                                                                                                               Virginia Beach
                                                                                                                                                        Columbus
                                                                                                        Las Vegas                                                                            Richmond                                                     Dallas
                                                                                                                    Minneapolis
                                                                                                                                  Baltimore                                                                                                                                              Los Angeles
                                                                                                                                                                                  Portland
                                                Kansas City
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Memphis
                                                                  New York
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Cleveland
                                                                                                                                                                   Philadelphia
                                                                                                                                              Denver
                                                                                                          Boston                   Chicago                                                                                                     Detroit
                                                                                                                                                                                             Cincinnati
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Houston
                                                              San Francisco


                                                                                                              Metropoliatan Planning Organization region
                                                                 1st Quartile (low)                                                     2nd Quartile                                           3rd Quartile                                        4th Quartile (high)

   FIGURE 6.2. Share of transit-dependent households residing in four transit
   accessibility categories (sorted in increasing order on the highest transit-
   accessibility quartile)
                                  ACCESSIBILITY IN SOCIAL-EQUITY EVALUATION          113


of public-transport lines, on housing-stock constraints, or on other barriers
impeding the location of transit-dependent households in transit-rich areas. One
desirable attribute of this indicator is its automatic scaling to the public-transport
accessibility of any given region. For example, while analysis of Kansas City’s overall
public-transport accessibility in comparison to New York’s makes little sense, the
indicator in figure 6.2 shows that the two have achieved a similar match between
public-transport accessibility and transit-dependent populations.


The Mode-Location Match Ratio
The charts presented so far have shown the disparity in accessibility by mode and
location alone. A quantitative indicator can be created to take the information in
these charts one step further by accounting for the locations of car-owning and
carless people. The “Mode-Location Match Ratio” (MLMR) is defined as the sum
across all zones in a region of (a) public-transport accessibility weighted by the
carless population divided by (b) auto accessibility weighted by the car-owning
population. Equation 6.1 formally defines the indicator:

          ∑ (a s )
                   N   t   t
                       i   i
   MLMR =          i
                                                                                   (6.1)
          ∑ (a s )
                   N   a   a
                   i   i   i

     Where MLMR is the Mode-Location Match Ratio for a metropolitan region;
ati is the accessibility index for travel by public transport for zone i; aai is the
accessibility index for travel by automobile for zone i; sti is the share of the region’s
transit-dependent households located in zone i; sai is the share of the region’s
automobile-owning households located in zone i. For a metropolitan region with
N zones, i = 1, 2, . . . , N.
     This weighted ratio is highest when locations of high public-transport accessi-
bility coincide with high shares of the region’s transit-dependent population. The
indicator would ordinarily range from 0 to 1, with the high values being produced
by high levels of public-transport accessibility and high proportions of transit-
dependent populations in the most accessible zones. Degradation of either vari-
able would reduce the value of the indicator, and as a practical matter, in the U.S.
context, the indicator would rarely exceed 0.4. The MLMR registers public-
transport accessibility to the extent that transit serves the transit-dependent
population. If a region chooses to improve public transport in the suburbs in a
way that fails to benefit the accessibility of the transit-dependent population, the
MLMR change would be slight, indicating a small impact for such a choice. By
contrast, a small improvement aimed at the locations of the transit-dependent
population could have a greater positive effect on the indicator.
114                CHAPTER 6


   The Mode-Location Match Ratio for a selected set of regions, in order of
descending values of the MLMR, is shown in figure 6.3. Within this set, the
regions with the best conditions for transit-dependent people include Washing-
ton, DC, New York, and Atlanta. By contrast, places like Cincinnati, Detroit, and
Houston offer the most unfavorable conditions for carless people.
   A high MLMR value can be achieved by (1) improving public-transport
accessibility overall relative to auto accessibility, (2) ensuring that transit acces-
sibility is provided where transit-dependent people live, or (3) enabling transit-
dependent people to relocate to transit-rich zones by ensuring that adequate
affordable housing is available there. The second and third steps are important.
To gain a sense of their magnitude of influence, consider the effect of step 1
alone. In addition to the MLMR, figure 6.3 includes an unweighted ratio, a value
that compares public-transport accessibility to auto accessibility by territory
alone, with no weighting to account for where carless and car-owning people



        0.40




        0.30




Ratio   0.20




        0.10




        0.00


                                                                                Los Angeles                                    Cincinnati
                                                                                                 Memphis
                                               Atlanta                                                     Houston
                                New York                 Portland                                                    Detroit
                                                                    Cleveland

               Washington, DC


                                           Mode-location match ratio                          Unweighted ratio

FIGURE 6.3. Mode-location match ratio, compared to unweighted ratio,
selected MPO regions
                                ACCESSIBILITY IN SOCIAL-EQUITY EVALUATION        115


live. For example, referring back to the charts reveals that the gap between auto
and public-transport accessibility is much smaller in Washington, DC, than it
is in Detroit (figure 6.1); thus, transit riders in Detroit are generally far more
disadvantaged relative to their car-driving counterparts than are transit riders
in Washington. The unweighted ratio in the chart offers a quantitative indicator
to capture what the charts reveal visually: Detroit’s unweighted ratio of 0.01 is
substantially below Washington, DC’s unweighted ratio of 0.12.
    Comparing the MLMR with the unweighted ratio in figure 6.3 reveals the
importance of accounting for the residential locations of transit-dependent
people. First, Los Angeles is an example where transit in general appears to
compete relatively well with the auto by territory alone (with an unweighted
ratio of 0.11). But, consistent with figure 6.2, transit is not serving a high share
of transit-dependent people in Los Angeles, as shown in the modest MLMR of
0.15 and the small difference between the MLMR and the unweighted ratio.
Second, New York is an example of just the opposite; public transport in general
fares much worse than the auto (unweighted ratio of 0.09) but makes up for this
disadvantage by providing a high share of the best public transport to locations
that house a high share of the region’s transit-dependent population (MLMR
of 0.34). Third, Washington, DC, appears to do well on both scores, offering
strong public-transport accessibility relative to auto accessibility (unweighted
ratio of 0.12), while also boosting the effectiveness of that transit by serving a
high proportion of transit-dependent people (MLMR of 0.37). Finally, Detroit
and Cincinnati appear to fall short on both conditions. Their public-transport
accessibility is generally low relative to their auto accessibility (MLMR of 0.02
for both), and they do not direct public-transport service in a way that covers
a high proportion of the transit-dependent population (unweighted ratio of
about 0.01 for both).
    Dependence on public transport usually constitutes an accessibility disadvan-
tage, but dependence on public transport while living where transit accessibility
is low is a double burden. The approach presented here emphasizes two main fac-
tors that contribute to the equity of accessibility among a metropolitan region’s
residents. First, regions where public-transport accessibility is high relative to
automobile accessibility are more equitable than others. Second, a region is more
equitable if a larger share of transit-dependent people is capable of living in zones
where public-transport accessibility is high. This second point has critical impli-
cations for public policy aimed at advancing social equity in transportation. It
underscores how land-use regulations and housing policies might contribute to
improving transportation equity by relaxing restrictions on affordable-housing
development in high-transit-accessibility locales and targeting the preservation
and development of affordable housing in such locales.43 And it offers clearer
116         CHAPTER 6


direction for public officials who are deciding where to invest public-transport
funds. If advancing social equity is a goal, then instead of minimizing the gap
between auto and transit accessibility overall, decision makers should give pref-
erential treatment to areas of metropolitan space where large shares of transit-
dependent people live when deciding where to make investments in public
transport. This is all the more necessary given highly constrained public trans-
port budgets.



Accessibility Metrics for
Social-Group Comparison
While the MLMR is sensitive to locations of transit-dependent people, as
a single metric, it does not convey a distribution across a population and
across metropolitan territory. By contrast, analysis of distributions can high-
light areas of advantage and disadvantage of population segments, such as by
ethnicity or income, sometimes revealing unexpected outcomes. Equity analy-
sis pertains to these groupings in part because public agencies in the United
States have been mandated to address the needs of travelers specifically by race
and income.44
    An effective analysis of social equity requires that accessibility indicators be
comparable on a common scalar across social groups. But prevailing metrics
of accessibility, such as the cumulative-opportunities approach or the gravity
model, present a key obstacle to making such comparisons, because they are lim-
ited to the analysis of a single mode at a time. These metrics fail to account for
the differing use of travel modes among social groups, such as those defined by
race and income. For example, racial minorities depend on public transport far
more than whites; African Americans are about eight times as likely as whites to
make a trip by bus.45 To compare social groups, it is necessary to control for the
fact that some groups depend disproportionately on the public-transport mode.
    Accessibility indicators are frequently created for a spatial zone rather than for
individuals. As place-based measures, they attribute the same level of accessibil-
ity to every person in a zone, regardless of personal preferences or capabilities
regarding mode of travel. The typical approach to calculating accessibility indi-
cators is to treat travel modes separately, using one indicator for travel by auto
and another indicator for travel by transit. The primary reason for calculating
separate indicators is that the travel-time difference between the modes impedes
their meaningful combination into a composite metric.
    The key to making measurable comparisons across social groups while con-
trolling for modal differences is to conduct the analysis at the level of a household.
                                ACCESSIBILITY IN SOCIAL-EQUITY EVALUATION      117


For our measures, each household is assigned a place-based accessibility score
from the zone of residence. A household is assigned one of two accessibility
scores—auto or transit—depending on the household’s vehicle availability.46 Any
household without a vehicle is assumed to be dependent on public transport, and
such a household experiences only transit accessibility. Conversely, any house-
hold with a vehicle available is assumed to experience auto accessibility, and
every member of the household is assumed to experience auto accessibility. This
assumption, which is driven primarily by data availability, suffers from certain
shortcomings. How any one person among several in a household experiences
accessibility is clearly more complicated than this assumption suggests. People in
carless households are not necessarily dependent on transit; they may share rides
with car owners or restrict their housing locations to be within walking distance
of their destinations. Conversely, all people who live in a household with a car do
not necessarily use that car. In a household where the number of workers exceeds
the number of cars, some members may be forced to rely on transit.


Accessibility Equity and Household Income
The relationship between accessibility and income is complex. Although one
might expect low income to consistently translate into an accessibility disad-
vantage, this is not necessarily the case. Several dimensions of the accessibility
concept vary systematically by income, including the availability of a car and
residential location. People with low incomes may be unable or unwilling to
pay the high costs of owning a private automobile. Such people are more highly
dependent on other modes of travel for accessing opportunities and tend to be
disproportionately affected by policies that favor mobility for cars and contrib-
ute to the decentralization of land-use patterns. On the other hand, low-income
people in the United States often live in more central parts of metropolitan areas,
a location that can confer on them an accessibility advantage, particularly if they
own a car.47
    These factors combine to shape a household-level, mode-adjusted employ-
ment accessibility by income group, as exemplified in the case of Baltimore (fig-
ure 6.4). In Baltimore, about half of the households in the low-income group
experience lower levels of accessibility to jobs than the other income groups.
Low-income households at the low end of the accessibility range are mainly
car-owning households located in zones at the periphery of the region and
transit-dependent households located anywhere in the region. However, the
low-income line crosses the high-income line around the median. Although
low-income households are disadvantaged in the low range of accessibility, at
the high end of accessibility it is just the reverse: low-income households are
118        CHAPTER 6


advantaged relative to their high-income counterparts in the high-accessibility
range. Low-income households at the upper end of the accessibility range are
mainly car-owning households that experience a locational advantage over
their high-income counterparts because they reside near the center of the
region.
   Analysis of sectoral accessibility distributions as presented here can forestall
misdiagnosis of problems. For example, with a significant share of the low-
income population actually advantaged by their location, spatial mismatch may
be less of a problem than the threat to accessibility posed by displacement from
central locations stemming from reductions in housing affordability.48 Most
U.S. metropolitan regions reveal patterns that are similar to the case of Balti-
more, highlighting the disparate levels of accessibility disadvantage faced by low-
income households.49




                                      400,000




                                      300,000




                Accessibility index
                                      200,000




                                      100,000




                                           0
                                                0       25           50            75             100

                                                      Household accessibility percentile

                                                    Low-income        Mid-income           High-income


FIGURE 6.4. Mode-adjusted accessibility to work by household accessibility
percentile and household income, Baltimore
                                                          ACCESSIBILITY IN SOCIAL-EQUITY EVALUATION        119


Accessibility Equity and Race
The components of accessibility vary considerably by race. Racial minorities
tend to own fewer cars and rely more heavily on public transport, which sug-
gests that they experience an accessibility disadvantage.50 Racial minorities are
also not evenly spread throughout metropolitan space; African Americans in
particular tend to be disproportionately located at the urban core in many U.S.
metropolitan regions due in part to exclusionary zoning practices and histori-
cal racial discrimination in housing markets.51 Residing in a central position in
metropolitan space may be an advantage in terms of accessibility. Whether this
locational advantage is enough to offset the mobility disadvantages of carless-
ness is an open question. For instance, while transit dependency is ordinarily a
substantial disadvantage in accessibility, some metropolitan regions may provide
transit service at a level that nearly compensates for this disadvantage. And some
metropolitan regions may offer a larger share of people in need of good transit
service the option of living in accessibility-rich places.
   Analysis of accessibility by race can be carried out for any census-defined
groupings; the following graph compares accessibility between Asian, black,
and white populations in selected U.S. metropolitan areas. For example, the




                                          1,600,000




                                          1,200,000




                    Accessibility index    800,000




                                           400,000




                                                 0
                                                      0       25           50           75           100

                                                            Household accessibility percentile
                                                                   Black        Asian        White



FIGURE 6.5. Mode-adjusted accessibility to work by household accessibility
percentile and race, New York
120        CHAPTER 6


mode-adjusted accessibility to jobs varies notably among the three racial groups
in the New York region (figure 6.5). Asians as a group experience higher acces-
sibility than the other two groups. Blacks and whites are similar through most of
the distribution, except for a small segment where blacks are advantaged in the
medium-to-high range of accessibility.
   The case of Los Angeles offers a contrast to that of New York in the compari-
son of blacks and whites (figure 6.6). In Los Angeles, blacks tend to experience
higher accessibility than whites through most of the distribution, a pattern
that is substantially different from New York’s. The difference may be due in
part to a higher degree of centrality among blacks in Los Angeles as compared
to New York, which may reflect differences in constrained residential location
choices or other historic settlement patterns. The difference in car-ownership
rates between blacks and whites also probably plays an important role in
explaining the variation found in the figures for New York and Los Angeles.
For example, a substantially larger share of African Americans in Los Angeles



                                          700,000




                                          600,000




                                          500,000




                    Accessibility index
                                          400,000




                                          300,000




                                          200,000




                                          100,000




                                               0
                                                    0   25           50            75                100

                                                        Household accessibility percentile

                                                             Black         Asian             White



FIGURE 6.6. Mode-adjusted accessibility to work by household accessibility
percentile and race, Los Angeles
                                                                                                                                                  ACCESSIBILITY IN SOCIAL-EQUITY EVALUATION                                                                                                                                                          121


  live in households with vehicles available (figure 6.7). Furthermore, the gap in
  vehicle availability between blacks and whites is considerably smaller in Los
  Angeles than in New York. The advantage that black Los Angelinos experience
  is likely driven in large part by high black vehicle-availability rates, especially if
  a large share of blacks in the Los Angeles region are living in central locations
  (figure 6.6).
      The accessibility advantage that blacks as a group experience in Los Angeles
  and New York may run counter to the expectations of some. Indeed, the conven-
  tional understanding in the social science literature is that racial minorities are
  disadvantaged in getting to opportunities in the United States because a growing
  share of metropolitan destinations are located in distant suburbs, while minori-
  ties live near the center.52 Yet, from an accessibility perspective, central locations
  position their residents nearer to a wider range of opportunities than anywhere
  else in a region.53



                               100




                               90




Household car-ownership rate
                               80




                                70




                               60




                               50


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Los Angeles                              Colombus
                                                                           Boston
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Charlotte
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Kansas City
                                                                                    Chicago                                                                                                                                 Las Vegas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Atlanta



                                                                                              Minneapolis–St. Paul
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Houston
                                                                                                                     Cincinnati
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Denver                                   Tucson
                                     New York                  Baltimore                                                          Cleveland                                                                                             Richmond
                                                Philadelphia
                                                                                                                                                                          Detroit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Memphis

                                                                                                                                                         Washington, DC
                                                                                                                                                                                    San Francisco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Seattle                                                                Dallas
                                                                                                                                              Portland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Virginia Beach




                                                                                                            Metropolitan Planning Organization region

                                                                                                                                  White                                             Asian                                         Black

  FIGURE 6.7. Intermetropolitan comparison of vehicle-availability rates, by race
  (sorted in increasing order of African American car ownership)
122         CHAPTER 6


    In this case, the equity dimension of accessibility may be more one of mean-
ing than magnitude, because the accessibility that blacks experience varies for
different reasons than for whites. The majority of variation in white accessibility
is likely a product of freely chosen residential location, while the majority of the
variation in black accessibility may be a product of car availability. Monitoring
changes in such variables is important from a public-policy perspective. Whites
tend to live disproportionately in low-density communities, and they may be
paying a price in the form of low accessibility for doing so, consistent with land-
market theories that suggest that some households willingly trade off higher
transportation costs in exchange for larger homes and lots at distant locations.54
Seen in this way, differences in the matter of choice between blacks and whites
are important to recognize in evaluating accessibility outcomes.
    The finding that blacks are advantaged in accessibility terms in Los Angeles
and New York does not extend to all U.S. metropolitan areas. Several metropoli-
tan regions reveal patterns of distinct accessibility disadvantage for blacks. For
example, African Americans in Cleveland, Boston, and Philadelphia are severely
disadvantaged throughout the entire accessibility distribution (charts not shown
for brevity). All three of these regions are places with relatively low vehicle-
availability rates among blacks (as shown in figure 6.7), yet other regions with
comparably low vehicle-availability rates among blacks, such as Chicago and
Minneapolis–St. Paul, do not reveal a similar accessibility disadvantage. These
results underscore the importance of analyzing differences among social groups
on a region-specific basis by considering the effect of mode simultaneously with
the effect of residential location.



Social Equity and Urban-Form Dimensions of
Regional Accessibility
Accessibility is inherently linked to places and the people who live in them, and
accessibility analysis allows planners to identify which people are disadvantaged
in their ability to reach destinations. Where mobility-based analysis leaves a great
deal of uncertainty about whether a metric actually indicates disadvantage or
not, the meaning of an accessibility metric is consistent and clear because an
improvement in the ability to reach destinations is the ultimate goal of the trans-
portation system.
    The accessibility shift alone is not enough to advance social equity, but acces-
sibility metrics are essential for informing sound policy choices. The analyses
presented in this chapter acknowledge that multiple goals are in competition in
decisions about transportation policy, but they show how accessibility metrics,
                                ACCESSIBILITY IN SOCIAL-EQUITY EVALUATION        123


when linked to the people experiencing that accessibility, offer important insights
into questions of social equity in transportation. In the case of metropolitan
regions of the United States, no other determinant is as important as the avail-
ability of a car in achieving high accessibility. Lacking a car represents a severe
disadvantage in accessibility nearly everywhere, and elevating social equity in
transportation will require tools, such as those presented here, to direct resources
to transit-dependent people.
    Aside from the central importance of mode, accessibility-based analysis
underscores the importance of residential location in determining people’s
ability to access opportunities. Given a particular distribution of auto and tran-
sit accessibility, the location of carless people still shapes the accessibility that
people experience in a region. The match between transit-dependent house-
holds and transit-rich zones varies substantially between regions. Improving
that match opens up possibilities for advancing social equity with tools tradi-
tionally outside of the transportation realm, such as land-use regulatory reform
and housing policies that make it easier for people to choose to live where transit
is plentiful.
                                                                          7
NONWORK ACCESSIBILITY




Notwithstanding the attention that the commute receives in transportation-
planning practice, the work trip accounts for only a minority of travel; trips to
or from work count for only 16 percent of daily person trips and 19 percent of
distance traveled in the United States.1 For this reason, job accessibility in isolation
would only partially capture people’s ability to reach their destinations and thus be
an incomplete accessibility assessment. In this chapter, we develop a comprehensive
index of nonwork accessibility, apply it to large metropolitan regions in the United
States, and compare the distribution of nonwork accessibility to work accessibility.
   Nonwork differs from work accessibility in three important ways. First, peo-
ple’s propensity to travel long distances is significantly greater for work trips than
for nonwork trips. At 12.2 miles, the average work trip by car in the United States
is nearly twice the distance of the average shopping, family, or personal trip.2
The relative shortness of nonwork trips may result from the closeness of avail-
able alternative destinations (which renders longer-distance travel unnecessary),
a resistance to traveling longer distances for nonwork purposes, or some combi-
nation of the two. In any case, metrics of nonwork accessibility need to take into
account people’s greater resistance to long-distance travel to nonwork destina-
tions than to workplaces.
   Second, there are frequently good substitutes for nonwork destinations.
One grocery store or restaurant may be readily patronized instead of another.
Some nonwork destinations are not substitutable—there’s no good alternative
to “Mom’s house” and no good short-term alternative to “my school”—but

         124
                                                 NONWORK ACCESSIBILITY          125


for much nonwork travel, reasonably substitutable destinations are the norm.
Indeed, for many nonwork destinations, such as a trip to a park, the trip is only
worth making if it is convenient to do so. By contrast, for most workers, “my
workplace” has a unique and fixed location as long as they remain in their jobs;
even those who work at multiple sites rarely have complete discretion as to where
they work on a given day. To be sure, work locations other than one’s own remain
highly relevant to accessibility. Because U.S. workers change jobs more frequently
than they change addresses—the median U.S. resident changes jobs every 4.1
years and changes residences every 6.2 years3—locating one’s residence with
accessibility to significant job concentrations can be an important adaptability
strategy. But overall, the substitutability of work locations pales in comparison to
people’s short-term ability to choose among nonwork locations.
    Third, nonwork destinations are far more varied and less standardized than
work destinations. While not all jobs are created equal—and not all jobs are rel-
evant to any given individual—job locations may be combined with each other,
such that the statement “zone X contains 10,000 jobs” is meaningful. By con-
trast, a nonwork destination may be a park, a house of worship, the office of a
notary public, a supermarket, a regional shopping mall, or the house of a friend.
The differing meaning of each of these destinations and their differing capac-
ity to attract trips impede quantification of the concept of nonwork accessibil-
ity. Unlike jobs, which can be readily counted, nonwork destinations cannot be
meaningfully combined with one another without additional sorting, weighting,
or other processing to render them meaningful along a single scale. One con-
sequence of this incommensurability is that nonwork accessibility is frequently
defined sectorally as opposed to comprehensively, as when analysts investigate
access to food stores or health-care providers.4



The Importance of Nonwork Accessibility
Despite the large proportion of nonwork travel in total trip making, work-related
accessibility continues to hold an outsized importance to outcomes of interest
to transportation and land-use planners, notably residential-location choice,
and significant scientific and policy debates surround the relative importance of
work and nonwork accessibility. The prevalence of nonwork travel has led some
observers, such as Peter Gordon, Ajay Kumar, and Harry Richardson and Kang-
Rae Ma and David Banister to argue that the work trip has been overemphasized
in transportation and land-use policy and research:

         Accessibility to the workplace is the primary determinant of residential
         land rents and location patterns in the standard monocentric model
126         CHAPTER 7


         of urban land use that remains, much to our regret, the centerpiece of
         urban economic theory. Both the models constructed by transporta-
         tion analysts and the investment projects and policies implemented by
         transportation planners are almost always based on the assumption that
         the work trip is the only trip that counts.5

         The recent growth of trips for other purposes may also result in longer
         commuting because many households may consider trade-offs among
         a number of possible activities (e.g. families with children may priori-
         tize access to good schools). This means that a policy of jobs-housing
         balance could cause greater daily travels if the spatial distribution of
         non-work trips is not jointly considered. Therefore, minimizing the
         commute should not be a policy target on its own, particularly when
         non-work trips are increasingly important in the policies aimed at
         enhancing local and regional accessibilities.6

    Whether one’s concern is improving households’ accessibility, reducing
vehicle-kilometers traveled, or coping with roadway congestion, the sheer
volume of nonwork travel merits policy attention. Yet studies of the impact
of work and nonwork accessibility on household residential location—a cen-
tral outcome of policy concern due to its effects on all the outcomes we have
mentioned—suggest that nonwork accessibility shapes people’s locational
choices only weakly, while workplace access is one of the most influential vari-
ables in multivariate models of residential location choice.7 For example, access
to retail, food, and other services was found to have some influence on house-
holds’ residential choice, but much less than job-accessibility variables.8 Simi-
larly, a study of relocating residents in the Puget Sound, Washington area, found
that workplace accessibility had a significant influence, but the retail-accessibility
variable tested had none.9 Nonwork accessibility may affect residents’ everyday
lives in important ways, but it does not seem to have a great influence on most
people’s residential-location choice.



Development of a Nonwork
Accessibility Index
The absolute importance of workplace accessibility to residential location choice
may not be surprising, but its strong influence relative to the larger share of
travel represented by nonwork destinations remains unexplained. In order to
explore this issue, a comprehensive metric of nonwork accessibility is required,
                                                  NONWORK ACCESSIBILITY          127


in contrast to most indicators of nonwork accessibility, which have been specific
to sectors such as retail or services.10 One approach to constructing a general
index used people’s duration of nonwork activities as an indicator of the attrac-
tiveness of nonwork destinations; the more time a person spent at a destination,
the more valuable it was considered to be.11 Since this metric depends on trips
actually taken to the specific destinations in question, it is incompatible with
the notion of accessibility as potential for interaction. Another approach defined
six types of destinations (cultural services, educational services, health services
and facilities, sports and recreational facilities, bank branches, and other types
of services and facilities) and used cluster and factor analyses to combine these
into an accessibility metric.12 In an accessibility study at the intercity scale, the
gross domestic product of each urban agglomeration was used as the indicator of
destination attractiveness.13 Another study implemented Torsten Hägerstrand’s
space-time accessibility concept using locations of actual activity participation
from a household travel survey.14 But comprehensive, as opposed to sector-
specific, assessments of household nonwork accessibility from the perspective of
opportunity for interaction are rare.
   A general metric of the attractive capacity of nonwork destinations should
have the following attributes:

   a. It should include the full range of nonwork destinations, rather than
      limiting itself to a single sector.
   b. It should weight nonwork destinations by their relative attractiveness.
   c. It should be consistently implementable with available data for multiple
      metropolitan areas.

   Because of the broad range of nonwork destination types, their definition is
somewhat more intricate than that of their workplace counterparts. The metric
developed here identifies nonwork destinations from a comprehensive database
of work destinations. The guiding concept is that job locations can provide an
indicator for the location of nonwork destinations, since many nonwork des-
tinations such as shopping or service locations, restaurants, and schools are
also the sites of jobs. But whereas every job is relevant to employment acces-
sibility by definition, only some jobs are indicators of nonwork destinations.
For example, while both a job in a steel foundry and a job in a supermarket
are relevant to the measurement of employment accessibility, only the latter is
included as a nonwork destination. Conversely, the implicit assumption is that
every significant nonwork destination can be located through the presence of
some jobs (or residences) on site. This assumption does not hold universally;
for example, most jobs associated with city parks, which are proper nonwork
128         CHAPTER 7


destinations, would be reported with locations at the municipal headquarters,
rather than in the park itself.
    The attractiveness of a nonwork destination type is gauged here through its
nationwide capacity to attract trips. This attractive capacity is based on data from
the U.S. National Household Travel Survey (NHTS), which categorizes nonwork
travel into thirty-five purposes including shopping, errands, and purchasing
goods; meals and other social events; visiting friends and relatives; exercise or
sports; and purchasing services (appendix A, table 7a).15 The distribution of non-
work trips in a given metropolitan area is assumed here to match the U.S. distri-
bution of trips in the NHTS. This assumption is a limitation of the method, but
the alternative of relying on household travel surveys from multiple metropoli-
tan planning organizations (MPOs) would impede the consistent comparison of
nonwork accessibility between metropolitan areas.
    If trip-attraction capacity is the metric of the relative attractiveness of a non-
work destination, then shares of nonwork travel should guide the development of
a weighting scheme within the index. For example, if retail accounts for 29 percent
of nonwork trips, it should account for 29 percent of the nonwork accessibility
index. This method required a correspondence between NHTS destinations and
North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) codes, a system used to
characterize jobs by industrial sector in the United States. Developing this cor-
respondence required certain modifications. For example, some classifications
in NHTS such as “transport someone,” “pick up someone,” or “drop someone
off ” are reasonably clear as trip purposes but cannot readily be linked to spe-
cific destinations and hence were dropped from the analysis. Other trip-purpose
classifications, such as “buy goods: groceries/clothing/hardware store,” “medical/
dental services,” or “get/eat meal” were easily assigned relevant NAICS codes.
Some trip purposes (e.g., “go to religious activity” and “attend funeral/wedding”)
were merged because while the trip purposes were distinct, there was significant
overlap in the destinations. Finally, one trip purpose, “visit friends/relatives,” had
no potential indicator among the employment-based NAICS codes; population,
rather than jobs, was used as the indicator for this trip purpose.
    In some cases, the analysis excluded business types because they were not
relevant to accessibility from one’s home zone. For example, hotels and other
tourist destinations were excluded since they are usually most relevant when
people are not making trips from home. Car dealerships, which account for a
significant number of jobs, were excluded since the low frequency with which
nonemployees visit these establishments renders them only marginally relevant
to home-based accessibility. By contrast, hospitals were included despite their
low frequency of visits since these were assumed to have a significant value inde-
pendent of actual use: their presence provides an assurance that augments one’s
                                                NONWORK ACCESSIBILITY          129


accessibility even when they are not needed. Dropping and merging categories
resulted in a set of twenty-four nonwork-trip categories that could be linked to
relevant job or population types (appendix A, table 7a).
   With a set of nonwork destination types defined, and the number of jobs
or population associated with those destinations identified, the potential attrac-
tiveness of a job or person in each category was assessed as the number of non-
work trips that the average job or person from these categories attracted per day.
This number was approximated in relation to the number of work trips based
on the assumption that each job attracted one work trip per day; this assump-
tion, together with the number of jobs in the region and the share of work trips
throughout the United States, formed the basis for estimating the total number
of regional nonwork trips.
   Finally, nonwork accessibility indicators were calculated following the stan-
dard gravity model formulation, with the impedance coefficient adjusted for
nonwork travel according to the method described in Levine et al.16
   The nonwork attractiveness index is calculated in four steps:

   1. Estimate total nonwork trips for a region. Using the total number of
      jobs in a metropolitan region and the ratio of nonwork to work travel,
      estimate nonwork trips as follows:
               ⎛ 0.823 ⎞
      Nm    Jm ⎜       ⎟                                                    (7.1)
               ⎝ 0.177 ⎠
      where Nm is the estimated number of nonwork trips for metropolitan
      region m, Jm is the number of jobs in metropolitan region m, and the
      fraction in the right-hand term is the ratio of the national share of
      nonwork to work trips.
   2. Distribute the total nonwork trips across the categories of trip purposes.
      Assuming that the distribution of trip purposes is the same in a
      metropolitan region as it is nationwide, express this as:

      Nr   N m ( Er )                                                       (7.2)

      where Nr is the number of nonwork trips in a metropolitan region
      for trip purpose r, and Er is the share of national nonwork trips for
      purpose r.
   3. Express the nonwork trips by purpose on a per-job basis. The relevant
      jobs are those in the subset of all jobs that correspond to specific
      nonwork destination types.
      Nr
                                                                            (7.3)
      Jr
130         CHAPTER 7


      Jr is the number of jobs in the metropolitan region associated with
      trip purpose r. For the trip purpose “visiting friends and relatives,” the
      attractor is not jobs but population.
   4. Calculate the nonwork attractiveness of each zone.
             k
      Wi    ∑ ( N ÷ J )J
            i =1
                   r    r   ir
                                                                               (7.4)

      where Wi is the nonwork attractiveness index at zone i, and Jir is the
      number of jobs in zone i associated with trip purpose r.

   This zone-based nonwork attractiveness index—which is generalized over the
course of the day, rather than time-of-day specific—then becomes the measure
of destination attractiveness used as an input to calculate nonwork accessibility
metrics, whether by car, public transport, walking, or cycling. The metric cap-
tures an overall average attractiveness level throughout the day. The following
sections demonstrate its use in the case of auto accessibility across thirty-eight of
the largest metropolitan regions in the United States.


Nonwork Auto Accessibility in Selected U.S.
Metropolitan Areas
The index enables a comparison of nonwork accessibility across metropoli-
tan regions based on a wide range of nonwork destinations. Like the metrics
of workplace accessibility, these are associated with metropolitan area size, with
the more populous metropolitan regions offering greater nonwork accessibility
(figure 7.1). Within very large metropolitan areas, Los Angeles’s nonwork acces-
sibility exceeds that of New York’s up to a point just beyond the median resident
(in accessibility terms). That is, for residents at the low end of the accessibility
spectrum (generally those living in the farther-out suburbs), Los Angeles resi-
dents enjoy greater nonwork accessibility than their New York counterparts. By
contrast, at the higher (more central) end of the accessibility spectrum, New York
offers greater nonwork accessibility. The New York/Los Angeles gap becomes very
large above the 75th percentile, presumably because New York has much larger
concentrations of destinations in central locations. Chicago’s nonwork accessi-
bility, by contrast, is considerably lower than either New York’s or Los Ange-
les’s, in large part because Chicago has relatively slow traffic (as analyzed from
the peak-period travel-time matrices supplied by the respective metropolitan
planning organizations). Figure 7.1 demonstrates similar comparisons for large,
medium, and small metropolitan regions.
                      1,800,000

                                                                                                                                 600,000


                      1,600,000



                                                                                                                                 500,000
                      1,400,000




                      1,200,000
                                                                                                                                 400,000




Accessibility score                                                                                      Accessibility score
                      1,000,000



                                                                                                                                 300,000
                       800,000




                       600,000
                                                                                                                                 200,000



                       400,000


                                                                                                                                 100,000
                       200,000




                             0                                                                                                           0
                                     0          25                   50             75             100                                       0               25                    50               75           100

                                                         Population percentile                                                                                      Population percentile
                                               New York               Los Angeles        Chicago                                                   Dallas               Detroit             Houston        Atlanta




                                                                                                                               400,000
                      300,000



                                                                                                                               350,000

                      250,000

                                                                                                                               300,000



                      200,000
                                                                                                                               250,000




Accessibility score                                                                                      Accessibility score
                                                                                                                               200,000
                      150,000




                                                                                                                               150,000

                      100,000


                                                                                                                               100,000



                       50,000
                                                                                                                                50,000




                            0                                                                                                       0
                                 0             25                50                 75             100                                   0                  25                    50                75           100
                                                     Population percentile                                                                                          Population Percentile
                                         Hartford       Louisville        Richmond          Tucson                                           Orlando             Portland               Charlotte        Kansas City




 FIGURE 7.1. Nonwork accessibility by automobile, selected very large (>9m),
 large (5–9m), medium (1.5–5m), and small (1–1.5m) metropolitan planning
 organization areas (clockwise from upper left)
132        CHAPTER 7


Nonwork Accessibility’s Weak Influence
on Residential Location
A comprehensive metric of nonwork accessibility by car can help investigate
questions that sectoral models of nonwork accessibility (such as accessibility to
retail or health care) are unable to answer. For example, with over 80 percent
of travel being to destinations other than work, households might be expected
to make their decisions about where to locate largely on the basis of nonwork,
rather than work, accessibility. One possible explanation for the relatively weak
influence of nonwork accessibility on residential location choice is that nonwork
accessibility is more broadly distributed than workplace accessibility. If this were
the case, then perhaps households would not need to consider nonwork acces-
sibility much when deciding where to locate; virtually no matter where they live,
they would find desirable nonwork destinations within reach. This section uses
the comprehensive nonwork accessibility index to test this candidate explana-
tion for the relatively weak influence of nonwork accessibility on where people
choose to live.
    An investigation into how broadly or narrowly nonwork accessibility is dis-
tributed needs to start with an investigation of the distribution of nonwork
destinations. The nonwork attractiveness index (Wi), an indicator of those des-
tinations, was nearly 11 percent more dispersed than work destinations. In this,
the dispersion of nonwork-destination attractiveness was closer to that of the
population’s spread-out residential locations than of concentrated metropoli-
tan work destinations, as measured by the standard deviational ellipse.17 With
a greater dispersion of destinations, nonwork accessibility could potentially be
more evenly spread than its workplace counterpart.
    But while accessibility assessment starts with measures of destination attrac-
tiveness (Wi), it also incorporates network travel time and people’s willingness
to travel for work or nonwork purposes. The evenness of accessibility’s distribu-
tion across a territory can be measured with the Gini Index, as demonstrated
in chapter 6. Recall that a Gini Index value of zero indicates a perfectly even
distribution (every zone experiences the same level of accessibility), and a value
of one indicates maximum inequality (one zone experiences all the accessibility
that a region offers, and all others have none). A larger Gini Index thus indicates
that the distribution of nonwork accessibility is more unequal, with accessibility
concentrated in a smaller share of the regional territory.
    Surprisingly, for most regions, nonwork accessibility tends to be less evenly
spread than its workplace counterpart; the median Gini Index across the regions
is 0.31 for work and 0.36 for nonwork accessibility (figure 7.2). Since nonwork
location attractiveness is more broadly spread than workplace locations, the
                                                             NONWORK ACCESSIBILITY              133


explanation for this difference lies principally in people’s significantly lower
willingness to travel long distances to nonwork destinations. The willingness of
most people to travel greater distances to work than to nonwork destinations has
the effect of distributing workplace accessibility relatively evenly despite the fact
that workplaces are more concentrated than residences or nonwork locations.
By contrast, the small search radii for nonwork destinations tend to concentrate
nonwork accessibility into a more limited set of locations. When people expect
grocery stores, restaurants, or houses of worship to be close by, their absence from
the neighborhood can create a significant local deficit in nonwork accessibility.
   For this reason, the relatively low influence of nonwork accessibility over
people’s residential-location choices is apparently not explained by a broader
distribution of nonwork accessibility across metropolitan regions. The explana-
tion would need to be found elsewhere—for example, in the greater flexibility in
choosing where and when to travel in meeting nonwork needs, or in the inability
of some households to opt into high-nonwork-accessibility locations because
of discrimination, lack of affordability, or other barriers. Land-use regulation
that constrains housing supplies in areas of high nonwork accessibility could



0.6


0.5


0.4


0.3


0.2


0.1


0.0
               Las Vegas

                                                                                                 Median
               Memphis
            New Orleans
                  Tucson
                Portland
              Cincinnati
               Louisville
               Rochester
              Oklahoma
             Kansas City
                  Denver
                 Phoenix
              Richmond
            Philadelphia
              Columbus
                Hartford
               Baltimore
          Virginia Beach
             Los Angeles
                   Dallas
              San DIego
            Indianapolis
      Minneapolis–St.Paul
                  Detroit
                 Orlando
                Nashville
           San Francisco
                   Seattle
            San Antonio
               Cleveland
                  Boston
                 Chicago
                Houston
               Charlotte
                  Buffalo
               New York
                  Atlanta
         Washington, DC
                Work accessibility Gini coefficient   Non-work accessibility Gini coefficient


FIGURE 7.2. Work and nonwork auto accessibility Gini Index by metropolitan
planning organization area, 2007 (rank order by work accessibility Gini
coefficient)
134         CHAPTER 7


constitute such a barrier, as could a paucity of high-nonwork-accessibility neigh-
borhoods that satisfy potential residents’ other desired characteristics, such as
safety, school quality, or high-quality municipal services.18
   In general, larger and more centralized regions tend to have more spatially
unequal distributions of nonwork accessibility overall: Washington, DC, New
York, Chicago, and Boston are all at the high (spatially unequal) end of the
Gini scale. The more even distribution of accessibility occurs in less centralized
regions, such as Los Angeles or Phoenix, and smaller regions such as Las Vegas
or Tucson. A broad spread of destinations throughout the region tends to reduce
intraregional gaps in accessibility by avoiding concentrations that particularly
benefit certain zones. Small regions frequently offer all households the ability
to reach all other corners of the area in a relatively short time, thus reducing the
inequality of accessibility between neighborhoods.



The Continuing Significance of
Nonwork Accessibility
Accessibility to destinations other than work has been measured in a number
of ways, generally in a sector-by-sector fashion. In this chapter, we describe a
method for gauging nonwork accessibility that spans the range of nonwork
destinations, as opposed to focusing on a preselected subset. Since the meaning
and importance of nonwork destinations vary broadly, the nonwork accessibil-
ity index developed here weights nonwork destinations by their average trip-
drawing potential. The method complements the more established methods of
gauging work accessibility in providing a comprehensive picture of people’s abil-
ity to reach their destinations and the distribution of this capacity by location
and population group.
    The limited influence of nonwork accessibility over residential-location
choice does not mean that nonwork accessibility is irrelevant to transportation
and land-use planning. Quite the opposite: poor access to healthy food degrades
nutrition, poor access to schools impedes education, and poor access to medical
care hinders the treatment and prevention of disease. All these concerns stem
from people’s inability to reach places and ought to be central to the professions
of transportation and land-use planning.19 But nonwork accessibility seems to
have less capacity than work accessibility to influence residential-location choice,
a factor that shapes important outcomes at both the individual and metropolitan
scales.
    Nevertheless, nonwork accessibility is distributed more unequally than
work accessibility in most metropolitan areas; people’s desire to have nonwork
                                                NONWORK ACCESSIBILITY        135


destinations close at hand means they experience the deficiency of convenient
nonwork destinations acutely even though nonwork destinations actually have a
wider geographic distribution. The distribution of nonwork accessibility remains
an important criterion for transportation and land-use planning success sim-
ply because it constitutes the vast majority of trips and distances traveled, and
because people’s ability to reach meaningful destinations for education, medical
care, recreation, and the like is central to their well-being. Comprehensive and
broadly applicable metrics, such as the one developed here, can help assess out-
comes for both transportation and land-use planning.
Conclusion

ENVISIONING THE
ACCESSIBILITY SHIFT




Three logics contend for status as transportation planning’s conceptual core:
mobility, vehicle-kilometers-traveled (VKT) reduction, and accessibility. The
transportation-planning field began in the first half of the twentieth century
with a mobility orientation. By the end of the century, many planners and
researchers had shifted to VKT reductions as the implicit lodestone of progres-
sive action in transportation and land use, a goal that, by the twenty-first cen-
tury, made its way into some formal policies—though the mobility paradigm
remained dominant overall. We have argued for a logic distinct from both of
these: an accessibility shift to align transportation and land-use planning with
transportation’s core purpose.
   Of the three logics, only accessibility is invisible. Immobility is evident to all
in the form of traffic jams or slow public transport. High VKT, the target of
driving-reduction efforts, is observable from evidence including travel surveys
or GPS-based data collection on vehicle movements. By contrast, accessibility is
a potential for interaction, present even when that potential is not translated into
observable travel behavior. Its very invisibility has impeded people’s comprehen-
sion and hence their acceptance of accessibility as something real.
   In addition to their visibility, mobility and VKT reduction share an important
attribute that aligns them with the traditional inclinations of planners and plan-
ning institutions. Following prescriptions emanating from welfare economics, a
policy-analytic tradition common in the United States and elsewhere generally
advises the policy maker to rely on the efficient functioning of the free market.

         136
                                       ENVISIONING THE ACCESSIBILITY SHIFT        137


Governments intervene, within this framework, when inefficiencies arise in the
form of market failures, especially negative externalities. By broad consensus,
governments exist to prevent or mitigate harm to their citizens; in this way a
negative externality, if large enough, constitutes a rationale for governmen-
tal intervention.1 Congestion, the prime target of mobility-based planning, is
one such externality. The air toxics, regional pollution, and greenhouse-gas
emissions associated with driving—and the prime targets of VKT-reduction
efforts—are another. For these reasons, planning for either mobility or VKT
reduction enjoys a legitimacy rooted in a broadly shared view of the proper role
of government. Limiting action to reduction of harms, such as those associated
with congestion or vehicular emissions, can help maintain the appearance of
restraint or even neutrality of governmental intervention into the workings of
the market.
    By contrast, accessibility planning, which is fundamentally benefit seeking
rather than harm avoiding, is mismatched with the negative-externality frame-
work. This helps explain why many seek to justify accessibility planning via the
instrumental view (see chapter 1): accessibility can be recognized through the
negative-externality lens if it proves itself in VKT-reduction (or even congestion-
mitigation) terms. Yet this tunnel vision comes at the cost of blindness to acces-
sibility’s other benefits.
    Notwithstanding the challenges it faces in the form of invisibility, accessibility
is the only reliable indicator, among the three contenders, of the benefits offered
by transportation. This renders both mobility and VKT reduction inadequate as
transportation planning’s central logic, an inadequacy that can lead to perverse
outcomes. For example, a household experiencing high congestion could be a
low- or a high-accessibility household; the latter would be able to interact with
many destinations, notwithstanding its low mobility.2 Fighting congestion for
the benefit of such households would result in resources poorly spent, especially
considering the potential for the fight itself to degrade accessibility through an
induced spread of origins and destinations.
    Despite accessibility’s inherent value, it can be hard to imagine it playing a
major role in guiding planning of the built environment. It may be that plan-
ning is relatively insensitive to analytical frameworks and evaluation metrics and
proceeds instead according to raw political imperatives. It may be that mobility
planning is not really a function of explicit policy choices but the spontaneous
and inevitable product of people’s immutable interests and desires. Or it may
be that planning interventions are not ultimately consequential, and the market
wins out in any case.
    We have argued against all three of these positions in favor of the idea that
how planning defines and measures success is highly consequential. The existing
138        CONCLUSION


mobility paradigm molds transportation and land-use planning at multiple lev-
els and geographic scales and demonstrably shapes metropolitan development.
This power suggests that the accessibility shift similarly holds great potential for
altering decisions and ultimately the built environment.3



Mobility and VKT after the
Accessibility Shift
Though neither mobility nor VKT reduction can capture the benefits of a trans-
portation/land-use system, both are still needed inputs into planning decisions.
Mobility analysis is an essential component of, and hence input into, accessibil-
ity analysis. Ostensible accessibility analyses that fail to account for mobility
devolve into analyses of simple proximity. For this reason, mobility analyses
would not be eliminated by the accessibility shift but would be combined with
information on land use to produce a meaningful investigation of transporta-
tion’s benefits.
    VKT analyses are similarly needed after the accessibility shift. While accessi-
bility is a metric of transportation’s benefits, it does not account for transporta-
tion’s harms, notably greenhouse-gas emissions and other pollutants. In many
cases, accessibility-improving strategies will also reduce environmental exter-
nalities, but this relationship is not assured (see chapter 1). A separate account-
ing for transportation’s harms, such as that offered by VKT, is necessary, but a
harm-avoidance strategy must not be taken as equivalent to a benefit-seeking
strategy.
    Accessibility and VKT-reduction goals are, however, interrelated as rationales
for planning action. Transportation and land-use planners are keenly interested
in land-use approaches to transportation issues, specifically the potential of
compact and mixed land uses as a strategy to reduce VKT. This strategy faces
a distinct limitation in the form of the slow pace of change of urban form.
Elements of the built environment are long-lived, and the change in any given
year will be small as a proportion of the established stock. Given these chal-
lenges, the aspiration for measurable regional travel-behavior shifts often seems
unreachable in the short term. Moreover, marginal change in the form of a walk-
able neighborhood in an auto-oriented region will likely support some car-use
reduction, but since much travel behavior is a function of the broader met-
ropolitan environment rather than of an immediate neighborhood, this effect
would be limited.
    Large-scale change in development patterns may promise more thoroughgo-
ing reductions in people’s use of cars, but promoting current policy on the basis
                                      ENVISIONING THE ACCESSIBILITY SHIFT        139


of potential long-run gains will always face an uphill political battle. Given this
challenge, accessibility can provide the immediate, short-term payoff needed to
demonstrate the benefits of many types of compact development. A new neigh-
borhood with easy access to work and nonwork destinations offers its residents
notable accessibility benefits, even if those benefits do not materialize as signifi-
cant VKT reductions in the short term. Demonstrable short-term accessibility
gains can obviate the need for immediate proof of benefit in VKT-reduction
terms, allowing the travel-behavior benefits of compact development to emerge
over the longer term.
    The implications of the accessibility shift for planning practice may be
farther reaching still. Planners understandably seek to demonstrate that public-
transport deployment and land-use approaches of compact, walkable, transit-
friendly urbanism lead to desirable environmental outcomes by reducing VKT.
Yet gains in air quality since the 1970s have largely stemmed from technologi-
cal advances such as the catalytic converter, rather than from planners’ efforts
at moderating VKT.4 Continued technological improvement in the automo-
bile may undermine the ability of transportation and land-use planners to rely
on atmospheric environmental concerns as a core basis for their actions. For
example, a future of sustainably powered electric vehicles, whether conventional
or self-driving, individually owned or shared, would greatly reduce the useful-
ness of VKT as a metric of transportation’s harms. Other environmental harms
related to the auto would still be relevant, to be sure. The automobile would
still impose environmental harms in the form of non-point-source water pol-
lution because of the impervious surfaces needed to support an auto-intensive
transportation and land-use system. Low-density urban forms associated with
the automobile would still lead to habitat depletion, and transportation-system
noise would still affect neighborhoods near major roads. But the elimination
of atmosphere-borne harms in the form of air toxics, regional air pollution, or
greenhouse gases, an unmistakable boon to global sustainability, would weaken
any transportation-planning rationale grounded in VKT reduction. The claim
that land-use patterns are an important environmental-policy instrument for
their capacity to reduce VKT may well be undermined by future technological
improvements.
    By contrast, the accessibility paradigm in transportation and land-use plan-
ning will remain a robust basis for action, as sound after the welcome techno-
logical change as before. A capacity to interact with destinations will still be the
service that people seek from their transportation systems, and that capacity will
still be delivered through some combination of mobility, proximity, and con-
nectivity. Land-use patterns, which determine the degree of origin-destination
proximity, will continue to be relevant to the delivery of accessibility.5 Planning
140        CONCLUSION


will continue to shape transportation systems, through investment, and land-use
systems, through regulation. Then, as now, accessibility can serve as the logical
foundation of the transportation/land-use planning enterprise.



Accessibility as Transportation/
Land-Use Integration
Yet a disjuncture between the planning of transportation and the planning of
land use impedes the pursuit of accessibility. Across multiple contexts world-
wide, the planning field aspires to integrate the two realms, which are commonly
planned for in relative isolation from each other. In most countries, the bodies
that plan for highways and public transport are distinct in their institutional
setting, professional logic, political imperatives, and geographic scale from those
that plan for the physical development of cities and regions. Disconnected plan-
ning frequently produces unsatisfactory results. Disjuncture between the two
realms abounds, for example, where land-use authorities permit development
in zones of poor transportation accessibility with no plans for connecting these
areas with the existing transportation system, or where transportation planning
expands roadway access to areas ostensibly slated for preservation. But like many
watchwords enjoying near-universal acceptance, “transportation/land-use inte-
gration” can mean many things.
    One dimension of the potential integration is institutional.6 According to this
thinking, if transportation and land-use planners interacted more, or more mean-
ingfully, or with better sharing of information and assumptions, they would plan
at cross purposes less frequently. The two systems are so entirely interrelated, in
this account, that the separation of realms is inherently damaging. The barrier to
integration of the two realms is often seen in terms of geographic scale; whereas
in many countries the municipality is the primary locus of land-use planning,
transportation planning occurs at the larger level of the metropolitan region,
province, district, or state. Aligning the geographic scale of the two endeavors is
key to rationalizing their respective planning processes. Even better, presumably,
would be if transportation and land-use were planned by the same institutions.
Although this version of the integration of transportation and land-use planning
has much to offer, a purely institutional definition of transportation/land-use
integration without guiding principles leaves unanswered the question: To what
ends is such integration to be directed?
    One common substantive definition of transportation/land-use integration
is represented by requirements that land development not be allowed to occur
unless sufficient transportation capacity, often interpreted as roadway capacity,
                                       ENVISIONING THE ACCESSIBILITY SHIFT        141


is provided. Since these requirements are oriented toward guaranteeing suf-
ficient infrastructure to maintain automotive level of service, they amount to
a mobility-based transportation and land-use integration. Thus, while these
requirements surely represent a substantive integration of transportation and
land-use planning, they can impede compact development, and as a conse-
quence, metropolitan accessibility (see chapters 3 and 4). These outcomes
would seem antithetical to the goals of many proponents of transportation
and land-use integration.
    The accessibility shift provides a sounder answer to the question “Integration
for what purpose?” By incorporating attributes of both the transportation and
land-use systems, the accessibility concept inherently integrates the two realms.
Advocates for transportation/land-use integration tend to support land devel-
opment in areas of high transportation accessibility, transportation investments
that serve already built-up areas, and improved spatial match between jobs and
housing. By shifting the definition of transportation success, the accessibility shift
can ease the way toward these policy reforms. Unlike the institutionally defined
version, it specifies the ends to which the endeavor is to be directed, and unlike
the version that insists on sufficient roadway capacity prior to land development,
it serves the core purpose of transportation.



Mobility Planning Ideology
Envisioning the accessibility shift depends in part on revealing the current default:
mobility-based transportation and land-use planning. Where accessibility can be
invisible because of its intangibility, its mobility counterpart can be obscured by
its ubiquity. Mobility thinking and formal mobility analyses pervade transporta-
tion and land-use planning from the local level, as when land-use decisions are
guided by their anticipated impact on car traffic, to the regional scale, as when
metropolitan areas compare themselves with their peers based on congestion
rankings.7 Mobility-driven decisions are evident wherever forecasts of roadway
congestion are used to guide investment in transportation infrastructure. The
methods of mobility appear in the manuals of professional organizations such
as the Highway Capacity Manual, the “Green Book” of the American Association
of State Highway and Transportation Officials, and the Traffic Engineering Hand-
book of the Institute of Transportation Engineers.8
    Mobility planning is even enshrined in law. In the United States, it has been
reinforced at the national level at least since the Federal Highway Act of 1963,
which mandated a “continuing, comprehensive, and cooperative” transportation-
planning process as a condition of federal funding. The mandate, while not
142        CONCLUSION


specific about methods, served to reinforce a mobility-oriented transportation-
planning system as the foundation of regional transportation planning, since
travel-demand modeling was the primary transportation-planning tool avail-
able at the time. More recently, guidelines based on Moving Ahead for Progress
in the 21st Century Act (MAP-21), a federal transportation law in the United
States, mandated that state departments of transportation and metropolitan
planning organizations monitor traffic congestion, excessive delay, and travel-
time reliability as three different dimensions of mobility measurement. At the
local level, municipal ordinances in cities nationwide mandate land-use plan-
ning aimed at maintaining highway level of service (text box C.1), often known
as “concurrency.”
    Mobility-based planning exists not only in the application of formal analytical
models and metrics, but also in the assumptions of participants in the transporta-
tion and land-use planning process, from engaged citizens to planners, engineers,
and decision makers. Even in the absence of quantitative forecasts of congestion,
popular worry about traffic can doom land-development projects; public dis-
course frequently conveys an unspoken presumption that roadway congestion is
the principal lens through which to scrutinize a proposed project’s desirability.
This is expressed in the near-universal complaint—which is sometimes a stalking
horse for class or race concerns—that new development will bring more traffic
to a neighborhood.9
    Mobility planning’s entrenchment in the transportation and land-use realms
can be daunting to the would-be accessibility reformer. But embedded in its deep
institutionalization lies a potential key to systemic change. Transportation and
land-use planners, seeking to ground their policies and investments in quan-
titative analysis of transportation and land-use conditions, know well how to
incorporate metrics and the product of models into their decision making.10 The
accessibility shift, while a potentially radical conceptual change, is methodologi-
cally no more than grafting a different set of metrics and methods onto existing
professional branches. The data needed are largely those in current use, and in
any case, standard mobility analyses remain as needed inputs into accessibility-
based decision making.
    Notwithstanding its ubiquity, mobility-based planning is anything but a
neutral default approach, and it is not merely the technical aggregation of pref-
erences of individual consumers or voters. It is the inscription of a particular
ideology into the built environment. The statement of the Institute of Trans-
portation Engineers that a transportation-impact analysis “should not include
political views or statements, nor should it take an advocacy position” is a logical
impossibility, since the analysis itself is grounded in a normative commitment to
mobility (nearly always interpreted as vehicular mobility) as the proper goal of
                                     ENVISIONING THE ACCESSIBILITY SHIFT       143


transportation and land-use planning.11 The accessibility shift does not escape
the normative nature of mobility planning; no notion of the good in guiding
plans and policies for the built environment could.12 Instead, it aligns planning
ideology and practice with what the planning field already accepts about the
purpose of transportation.




   Text box C.1: Examples of laws and ordinances
   mandating mobility-based planning
   City of Snoqualmie, Washington: Development shall be prohibited, and all
   applications therefore shall be denied, if the development would cause
   the level of service on a transportation facility to decline below adopted
   levels of service standards, unless the transportation improvements or
   strategies to accommodate the new development are made concurrent
   with the development, subject to the provisions of subsection D of this
   section.13
      Wake County, North Carolina: The traffic impact analysis must dem-
   onstrate that the proposed development would not cause build year peak
   hour levels of service on any arterial or collector road or intersection
   within the analysis area to fall below Level of Service (LOS) “D” (as defined
   by the latest edition of the highway capacity manual) or, where the existing
   level of service is already LOS “E”, that the proposed development would
   not cause the LOS to fall to the next lower letter grade. If the road segment
   or intersection is already LOS “F”, the traffic impact analysis must demon-
   strate that the proposed development, with any proposed improvements,
   would not cause buildout year peak hour operation to degrade more than
   5% of the total delay on any intersection approach.14
      Cities of Pocatello and Chubbuck and Bannock County (Idaho): Impact
   Studies evaluate the potential impact of a specific development on the
   existing system. Acceptable level of service standards for each intersection
   evaluated shall be in accordance with [the following principles]:

      • When the LOS without development is LOS A, B, and C, the mini-
        mum acceptable projected LOS shall be LOS C for all movement
        within a specific intersection.
      • When the LOS without development is LOS D, E, or F the mini-
        mum acceptable projected LOS shall be equal to the LOS without
        development.15
144        CONCLUSION


The Multiple Faces of Mobility Planning
Mobility-based planning shapes public decision making both formally and infor-
mally and operates on both transportation and land use. In many cases, mobility
planning influences or even determines built-environment outcomes; in others,
planning strategies geared to the pedestrian, cyclist, or transit user are adopted
after overcoming the resistance of operating against the mobility grain. And
mobility planning does not operate in isolation but rather interacts with broader
mobility-based thinking and local politics to produce planning decisions.
   This section illustrates typical avenues of influence of mobility-based plan-
ning through three case studies of transportation and land-use planning, located
in Albuquerque; Camden County, Missouri; and San Francisco. In combination,
they exemplify the influence of mobility on both transportation and land-use
planning, the role of formal processes and informal norms, and the obstacles
mobility planning can place in the path of any transportation or land-use inno-
vation that deviates significantly from accepted practice.



Formal Mobility Modeling
Around 2000, Paseo del Norte, a major east-west route in Albuquerque, was
serving as an important connection between the rapidly growing residential
development west of the Rio Grande and employment and activity along Inter-
state 25.16 Mitigating traffic congestion along Paseo del Norte at the I-25 inter-
change became a priority in the region, and the resulting project represents a
textbook example of the application of mobility methods to transportation
planning. Paseo del Norte was particularly important because it contained one
of seven bridges that crossed the Rio Grande to connect the west side of Albu-
querque with Sandoval County. The City of Albuquerque, the New Mexico
Department of Transportation (NMDOT), the Mid-Region Council of Gov-
ernments (MRCOG), and the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) con-
sidered a $350 million plan, ultimately settling on a scaled-down $93 million
plan to reconstruct the interchange.
   Several analyses conducted at various stages of planning illustrate the preva-
lence of mobility-based metrics in justifying a project. Before securing funding,
the city applied for a Transportation Investment Generating Economic Recovery
(TIGER) grant to fund the project. MRCOG conducted an Economic Impact
Report, published in November 2011, as part of the cost-benefit analysis required
for these applications. The analysis modeled average speed, average trip time,
vehicle miles traveled, vehicle hours of travel, and vehicle hours of delay for
the build and no-build alternatives to evaluate 2015, 2025, and 2035 outcomes.
                                     ENVISIONING THE ACCESSIBILITY SHIFT       145


In describing the purpose of the project, the required report referenced a
Congestion Management Process conducted by MRCOG, which summarized
statistics on the thirty most congested corridors in Albuquerque based on
volume-to-capacity ratio, speed differentials, and crash rates.17 The Congestion
Management Process ranked Paseo Del Norte as the thirteenth overall most con-
gested corridor, specifically noting the high congestion during rush hour, during
which the corridor carried sixty to eighty thousand vehicles per day. The analyses
used Level of Service (LOS scores A through F) to compare traffic volumes at
peak hour in 2035 with the no-build and the preferred projects.18 The report
demonstrated that the existing facility was not adequate for the projected travel
demand. The project was added to the Transportation Improvement Program
(TIP), and the proposed project was deemed to have a “smaller environmental
footprint” than its alternatives.19
   As with any formal planning analysis, the political assessment of needs was less
formal than the quantitative modeling, beginning with a view developed between
the various players as far back as 2001 that capacity needed to be expanded to
accommodate current and future vehicular flow. By 2011 the project had been
languishing due to funding difficulties, and according to one former politician,
a politically influential developer who stood to gain from the project was instru-
mental in its resurrection. The technocratic elements of travel-demand modeling
and LOS forecasting were all present but came after political processes determin-
ing project need. Yet the political actors were aware of, and surely influenced by,
the modes of formal evaluation that would be required if the project was to reach
completion.
   Accessibility-oriented thinking was absent, save one reference in a 2011 Eco-
nomic Impact Report arguing that when the network functions more efficiently,
“origins and destinations become closer to one another in terms of time and
cost.”20 The statement is accurate if one holds locations of land uses constant;
by contrast, a full accessibility analysis models land-use response to the major
transportation change before any assessment of the time and cost needed to over-
come origin-destination separation (see chapter 3). Neither this kind of land-use
modeling nor land-use approaches in general played a significant role in this
mobility-based evaluation.


Informal Mobility Thinking in Land-Use Planning
Mobility-oriented thinking can shape outcomes in land development as well as
transportation even when formal models are not deployed. This was the case in a
planning controversy in Camden County, Missouri, a popular summer-vacation
destination between St. Louis and Kansas City, where, in 2007, a land developer
146         CONCLUSION


sought to develop one hundred and eighty condominiums on 4.5 lakefront
hectares, which included both low-density residential and general commercial
zoning. The project would have required a conditional-use permit because the
proposal deviated from the parcels’ zoning designation, a permit that was denied
first by the Planning and Zoning Commission and later on appeal by the County
Board of Adjustments. The developer sued based on the claim that the proposed
uses were less intense than the uses for which the land was zoned; the suit lost
at both the trial and appellate courts with a finding that the municipality could
legitimately rely on the testimony of affected neighbors over that of expert wit-
nesses in denying the conditional-use permit.
    Both those who argued for and those who were against the development at
the Board of Adjustment’s public hearing relied on mobility-based arguments to
bolster their positions. The developer’s attorney maintained that “there would not
be much increased traffic flow in the area based on the nature of condominium
units and the fact that they are vacant a great deal of the time.”21 An engineer, a real-
estate agent, and an appraiser used similar arguments to support the development.
Neighbors opposed to the development expressed concerns including increased
traffic. One neighbor asked, “How in the world is a 130 condo unit going to help
anything as far as lessening congestion of traffic on the roads?”22
    In fact, traffic-impact analysis reported that any congestion effects of the pro-
posed development were not particularly severe. Although it would create some
traffic impacts, the developer could have alleviated these impacts by redesigning
the access points. However, the Planning and Zoning Commission denied the
initial conditional-use-permit application, citing traffic concerns supported by
mobility-related zoning considerations in three of its nine criteria. After the legal
appeals concluded, the entire site was downzoned to low-density residential, pre-
sumably to forestall similar proposals and controversies in the future. Ultimately,
given the discretionary nature of the conditional-use-permit application—the
County Board of Adjustments was not required to grant the requested permit—
the denial was a fairly straightforward matter, even though the traffic analysis
failed to back up the informal mobility worries of neighbors and other stake-
holders. The accessibility point of view, that is, an assessment of whether the con-
dominiums would have increased people’s ability to reach valued destinations,
was absent from the development-review discourse on both the prodevelopment
and antidevelopment sides.


Overcoming the Obstacles of Mobility Planning
The Bicycle Plan of the City of San Francisco, released in 2005, aimed to increase
space on city streets for bicycles in order to enhance the safety and amenability of
                                     ENVISIONING THE ACCESSIBILITY SHIFT      147


cycling and thereby to increase the number of city residents who would choose
cycling. This effort needed to overcome obstacles sourced in mobility-based
planning in order to do so. At the time, the California Environmental Qual-
ity Act (CEQA) categorized roadway congestion as an adverse environmental
impact, which triggered requirements of the project’s traffic impacts. Projects
such as the Bicycle Plan, which can potentially increase congestion by restricting
the space available for vehicles in favor of bicycles, needed to treat any slowing
of car traffic as an environmental harm regardless of the positive environmental
(and accessibility) impacts of improved bicycle infrastructure. Local residents
sued the city in 2006 for neglecting to conduct a full environmental-impact
report (EIR) on the 2005 Bicycle Plan, as per CEQA requirements. The court
required the City to conduct the EIR and placed an injunction on the plan until
it was completed. In 2010, after the city created the 2009 Bicycle Plan Final EIR,
which included a full study of the plan’s environmental impacts, the court lifted
the injunction.
    The Bicycle Plan received support from a number of stakeholders, including
Mayor Gavin Newsom, who, after the injunction was placed on the plan, said,
“Better, safer bicycling is good for San Franciscans and good for our environ-
ment. I remain committed to realizing our goal of a citywide bicycle network
that unites the current patchwork of bike lanes into a unified, comprehensive
system.”23 Despite this support, the potential “environmental” impacts caused by
limiting vehicle mobility slowed the enactment of the plan because it triggered
the EIR requirement.
    The EIR that led to the lifting of the injunction assessed roadway LOS impacts
in accordance with CEQA requirements.24 The LOS evaluations of the overall
goals and policies, and minor and long-term improvements, found several poten-
tially significant and unavoidable impacts. For example, the long-term improve-
ments, which included “area-specific changes in circulation patterns” and large
development projects, contained the following four potentially significant and
unavoidable impacts: “(a) a potential to increase traffic delays in some areas
of the City, (b) a potential to cause a significant adverse impact to intersection
levels-of-service; (c) a potential to slow transit vehicle movement in some loca-
tions; and (d) a potential to eliminate some curb space, currently used for pas-
senger loading/unloading or commercial loading/unloading. All these potential
impacts were identified as being potentially significant and unavoidable.”25
    Ultimately, the injunction was lifted, and the San Francisco Bicycle Plan was
adopted. But with traffic congestion framed as an environmental harm per se,
no provision allowed for its trade-off against potential accessibility benefits.
Effectively, promoters of the Bicycle Plan were put in the position of arguing
that impacts on car traffic are not overly onerous, or alternatively that options
148         CONCLUSION


that could mitigate negative LOS impacts were not feasible. A plan designed to
encourage an alternative to the car had to explain—and even justify—itself in
vehicular-mobility terms.



Accessibility-Based Reform Efforts
Common to the three cases we have mentioned is an immediacy of mobility
thinking and metrics to applied planning practice. Choices in either transporta-
tion or land use needed to be made, and mobility-based evaluation was one of
the first tools that planners deployed to support those decisions. At times, out-
comes were shaped by mobility-based thinking, which established the frame of
reference of interested parties even before any formal analysis took place.
    By contrast, accessibility-based evaluation is frequently removed from day-to-
day decision making. Planners and policy makers often view accessibility-based
evaluation as merely advisory, or as a visioning exercise at the regional level. These
are vital planning functions to be sure, but they have only indirect links to deci-
sions that shape transportation and land-use outcomes. Regional accessibility-
driven visions would face obstacles in simply making the leap to on-the-ground
implementation, but with mobility-based evaluation firmly ensconced at operative
levels, accessibility-related action struggles doubly to find its footing.26
    Nevertheless, regional planning is starting to incorporate accessibility-based
evaluation, an activity formerly dominated by mobility thinking alone, and
the process of developing shared visions matters even where implementation
is flawed. However, accessibility concepts must clear several hurdles before
they can effectively shape regional futures. First, accessibility must be properly
conceived as a concept distinct from mobility; frequently, accessibility remains
an undefined buzzword, or accessibility and mobility are fused into a single,
undifferentiated whole.27 Second, to be of practical use, accessibility must be
operationalized with conceptually sound measures that can influence decision
making; often the conceptualization of accessibility invokes a generalized notion
of “access” to the transportation system rather than a sharper focus on access
to destinations.28 Third, plans must specify explicit methods for incorporat-
ing accessibility into implementation, such as via project selection or develop-
ment review. So while the trend toward greater integration of accessibility into
regional planning efforts is a welcome beginning, much work remains before the
accessibility shift is realized. The next section uses instances of accessibility-based
planning at the regional level in the United States to illustrate both progress
and gaps in accessibility planning; similar themes emerge from international
analyses as well.29
                                      ENVISIONING THE ACCESSIBILITY SHIFT        149


Accessibility in the Shadows of Mobility
Federal guidance in the United States to address “accessibility and mobility”
in the transportation planning process, without accompanying distinctions
between the concepts, has led to many planning efforts that either fuse accessi-
bility and mobility or confuse their relationship to each other. The Puget Sound
Regional Council’s Transportation 2040 Plan is one such example.30 In some
locations within the plan, accessibility is defined as access to destinations, as
when accessibility is identified as a “measure of the ability or ease to travel among
various origins and destinations.”31 In other cases, accessibility is defined as
access to the transportation system itself, as in the following statements: “infra-
structure that provides full accessibility to transit facilities, such as sidewalks,
can broaden the transit market share for all users of public transportation”
and “mixed use developments can build ferry ridership and increase accessi-
bility to passenger ferry services.”32 Conceived of in the latter fashion, acces-
sibility serves mobility (by enabling people to use the transportation system),
rather than the reverse.
    This framing is consistent with the dominant mobility theme of the plan. The
plan’s key strategies are (1) improving mobility, (2) protecting and enhancing
the environment, and (3) identifying sustainable funding. In a similar manner,
the plan articulates its core purpose as follows: “Transportation 2040 was devel-
oped to provide accessible, affordable, and convenient mobility to all people
in the region. Transportation 2040 is about ensuring that everyone has access
to goods, services and jobs.”33 Mobility and accessibility are both recognized,
but mobility remains the central organizing concept throughout. Performance-
measure selection reinforces the impression of accessibility’s subservience in
the plan, with mobility metrics prominent and accessibility indicators absent.
The outcomes identified for monitoring and evaluating plan implementation
include roadway speeds, average per-capita travel time, daily per-capita traffic
congestion, and daily person trips per mode. Roadway speeds and per-capita
traffic congestion are strictly mobility-oriented performance measures. Aver-
age per-capita travel time is loosely related to accessibility but is a measure of
observed travel behavior, and not the opportunity to reach destinations per se.
For this reason, it fails to capture the value offered by the transportation/land-
use system. Standard accessibility metrics such as cumulative opportunity, grav-
ity, or utility-based measures are not included as performance measures within
the final planning document. Furthermore, the monitoring and implementa-
tion section of the plan calls for the measurement of “accessibility to transporta-
tion choices” but not accessibility to destinations. In short, although ideas about
accessibility are present within the plan, its overall thrust is about improving
150          CONCLUSION


mobility, and the role of accessibility is primarily conceived of as access to the
various components of the transportation system itself in order to enable such
mobility choices.


Accessibility as a Bit Player
In other plans, accessibility is consistently operationalized as access to destina-
tions rather than access to the transportation system itself. Nevertheless, when
accessibility plays only a small role among many competing criteria and goals,
its effect can be diluted. Unless accessibility constitutes transportation planning’s
mainstream, it can be lost in a deluge of other planning goals.
    The Chicago region embarked on a major regional planning effort in 2008
known as the “GO TO 2040” plan.34 As part of this regional-planning effort,
three major scenarios were developed in consultation with the public and stake-
holders. The “reinvest” scenario aimed to target future growth within existing
communities and to channel investment into the reconstruction of existing
infrastructure. The “preserve” scenario strove to preserve the existing character
of built communities and to minimize disruption of existing land-use patterns
by avoiding obtrusive transportation projects, focusing instead on small-scale,
localized transportation improvements. The “innovate” scenario sought to con-
tinue outward metropolitan expansion while also incorporating energy-efficient
technologies to mitigate the impacts of this outward growth.
    Each of the regional scenarios was fully developed as a future transporta-
tion and land-use plan, together with a suite of accompanying implementation
policies. These alternative futures were then evaluated against multiple metrics
of future regional performance including land consumption, percent of infill
development, open-space preservation, water use, land covered by impervious
surfaces, energy consumption, congestion, mode share, travel times, accessibility
to jobs by auto and transit, future industry mix, and infrastructure costs. This
analysis of future scenario performance was presented to stakeholders and the
public for further discussion and refinement. The process led to the selection of
a preferred regional scenario, which incorporated elements of each of the other
scenarios.
    The preferred regional scenario and the scenario analysis process were used
to identify a series of policy priorities, grouped into four major themes: livable
communities, regional mobility, human capital, and efficient governance. Nested
within these four major themes were twelve policy priorities:

      1. Achieve greater livability through land use and housing.
      2. Manage and conserve water and energy resources.
                                      ENVISIONING THE ACCESSIBILITY SHIFT       151


    3. Expand and improve parks and open space.
    4. Promote sustainable local food.
    5. Invest strategically in transportation.
    6. Increase commitment to public transit.
    7. Create a more efficient freight network.
    8. Improve education and workforce development.
    9. Support economic innovation.
   10. Reform state and local tax policy.
   11. Improve access to information.
   12. Pursue coordinated investments.

    Accessibility played a relatively minor role in the plan-development process,
and it was not a major driver in the policy development for the overall GO TO
2040 Plan. Accessibility metrics informed the performance evaluation of alter-
native scenarios and played a behind-the-scenes role in the development of the
preferred scenario, but the accessibility concept was not present within the four
major themes or the twelve policy priorities. The Executive Summary explain-
ing these regional policy priorities mentioned the word “accessibility” only once,
as follows: “First, the region should provide more parks in developed areas to
increase park accessibility and equity.”35 The behind-the-scenes role of accessibil-
ity within the planning process offered little opportunity for accessibility-based
thinking to shape the implementation of future transportation and land-use
decisions. Indeed, the plan explicitly noted that land-use decisions would be left
up to local authorities and exhorted them to strive for better transportation/
land-use integration without providing a framework for what such better inte-
gration would look like.
    When accessibility is considered as just one transportation-related criterion
out of many, its centrality as the primary measure of benefit provided by the
transportation/land-use system is neglected, and attention to its nuts-and-bolts
implementation is typically absent. In regional-planning efforts such as this one,
accessibility is nominally present, but its potential as a means of guiding the
development of the transportation/land-use system remains unrealized.


Accessibility Integrated into Project Selection
When plans identify specific links to decision making, the accessibility shift can
influence plan implementation as well as regional visioning. The key challenge
is to adequately identify accessibility not just as a single performance measure
among dozens but to elevate it to a primary goal in its own right. And ideally,
the subservient nature of mobility as a transportation planning goal would be
152        CONCLUSION


recognized as well, with mobility as a goal only to the extent that it contributes
to accessibility improvements.
   These principles were partially followed in the Virginia Department of Trans-
portation’s SMART Scale (System Management and Allocation of Resources for
Transportation) project prioritization process.36 The SMART Scale program
began when political leaders in Virginia sought to invest their transportation
infrastructure dollars more judiciously through a transparent and objective pro-
cess. The Virginia Legislature passed House Bill 2, which mandated an objective
and quantifiable process for the allocation of transportation-infrastructure dol-
lars. The specifics of the policies to implement House Bill 2 were developed by
the Commonwealth Transportation Board in 2015.
   The goals of the board were for the state to fully fund high-scoring projects
proposed by local governments and metropolitan planning agencies. It sought
project-prioritization criteria that would link transportation and land-use deci-
sion making, that would be capable of evaluating projects of all modes, and
that could be used to compare small and large projects alongside one another,
so that competitiveness in the project-selection process would be unaffected by
project size.
   The board decided on six major dimensions for consideration: safety, con-
gestion mitigation, accessibility, environmental quality, economic development,
and land use.37 (See table C.1.) To ensure simplicity, just one to three measures
were used to score each of these dimensions. This parsimoniousness facilitated
stakeholders’ capacity to quickly visualize the project-prioritization system and
to understand the relative importance of the various criteria. Different regions
of the state were permitted to weight the value of the six dimensions differ-
ently.38 Some areas placed more focus on economic development, while others
placed more focus on congestion mitigation. The state’s recommended weights
placed more emphasis on congestion mitigation (45 percent of the score) than on
accessibility (15 percent of the score) for major metropolitan areas. Thus, while
accessibility was represented explicitly in decision making, mobility remained an
independent goal with triple the weight of accessibility. Other goals such as safety
or environmental quality represented distinct and important dimensions of the
transportation system not captured by the accessibility goal.
   The accessibility dimension of the project-selection criteria included three
measures: accessibility to jobs, accessibility to jobs for disadvantaged persons,
and access to multimodal choices. As with the Puget Sound plan, the latter
measure, which focuses on access to the transportation system itself, captures
people’s ability to reach destinations poorly. Furthermore, a complete evalua-
tion of the accessibility effects of transportation projects demands attention to
their land-use impacts as well. This step was not present in the Virginia process.
                                                 ENVISIONING THE ACCESSIBILITY SHIFT                    153


TABLE C.1 Virginia Department of Transportation’s SMART Scale Project
prioritization criteria
FACTOR AREAS                        MEASURE ID                              MEASURES

Safety                              S.1               Number of fatal and injury crashes (50%)
                                    S.2               Rate of fatal and injury crashes (50%)
Congestion mitigation               C.1               Person throughput (50%)
                                    C.2               Person hours of delay (50%)
Accessibility                       A.1               Access to jobs (60%)
                                    A.2               Access to jobs for disadvantaged persons (20%)
                                    A.3               Access to multimodal choices (20%)
Environmental quality               E.1               Air quality and environmental effect (50%)
                                    E.2               Impact to natural and cultural resources (50%)
Economic development                ED.1              Project support for economic development (60%)
                                    ED.2              Intermodal access and efficiency (20%)
                                    ED.3              Travel time reliability (20%)
Land usea                           L.1               Transportation-efficient land use (100%)

Source: Virginia Department of Transportation, SMART Scale Technical Guide (Richmond, VA: Virginia Department
of Transportation, 2016).
a
    For areas over 200,000 in population



Furthermore, the weight accorded to accessibility in the ranking system was rela-
tively low, at least relative to the weight accorded to the mobility component.
   In the first round of project selection, in 2016, the SMART Scale process
yielded 321 projects, out of which 163 were eventually funded. The selected proj-
ects included a range of types, including pedestrian, transportation-demand-
management, and roadway projects. Both large and small projects were selected,
and several of the funded projects came in at under $1 million.
   The Virginia SMART Scale process was notable for its incorporation of
measured accessibility as a primary criterion for project evaluation. The pro-
cess would be more transformative still if congestion mitigation were not also a
primary criterion, but rather was considered within the context of congestion’s
accessibility impacts. The formal weighting scheme suggests a route for incre-
mental progress toward accessibility-based planning: gradually increasing the
relative weighting of accessibility in comparison with mobility as a measure of
transportation benefit.



Overcoming Obstacles to Reform
Yet, in practice, important constituencies guard mobility-based planning from
significant reform. In many planning contexts in the United States and elsewhere,
154        CONCLUSION


the most powerful of these are local constituencies, such as current residents,
neighborhood organizations, and business owners, who mobilize to pressure
public officials to enact and maintain regulations limiting development density,
in part to keep local congestion at bay. Restrictions on development densities
inexorably increase the spread of metropolitan regions, with attendant delete-
rious effects on accessibility, even by car (see chapter 4). These constituencies’
quest to protect their localized mobility ends up degrading the performance of
the transportation system when viewed from a broader perspective.
   These constituencies are nevertheless rational in seeking to protect their
own mobility. New development can pit the interests of incumbent residents
against those of would-be newcomers or against the residents of the region as
a whole. Consider, for example, a proposed higher-density residential devel-
opment in an established neighborhood near downtown or a major public-
transport station. The development might be analyzed as highly beneficial in
accessibility terms, much more so than if it were located at other potential sites
in the region. Yet, from the standpoint of incumbent residents of the neigh-
borhood, there is little accessibility to be gained and much to be lost. Since the
development is residential, it adds little to the destinations reachable by exist-
ing residents, but the new residents may add to roadway congestion, thereby
degrading the accessibility of the incumbents. Neighborhood resistance to
development is thus readily explicable in accessibility terms: although accessi-
bility gains will accrue to the newcomers and to the region as a whole, existing
residents may only see losses.
   Though the local exclusionary impulse is not a direct product of planning
institutions, it is at least in part shaped by them. Formalized mobility planning
legitimates and gives a methodological language—together with a professional
cadre to speak it—to the desire of congestion-mobilized neighbors for exclu-
sion. Yet the impulse of each neighborhood to protect its accessibility by exclud-
ing traffic-generating land uses restricts the development of locations with the
highest accessibility and therefore results in degraded regional accessibility. In
this sense, this transportation/land-use conundrum amounts to a tragedy of the
commons, where the actions of individuals who rationally seek their own self-
interest undermine a commonly shared good or resource, a core rationale for
planning to begin with.39 While acknowledging local interests, planners and pol-
icy makers can aspire to institutions that facilitate greater regional (and global)
representation.
   Professional insistence on the priority of accessibility in transportation and
land-use planning can be one of those institutions. When accessibility is the rubric
guiding planning decisions, the traffic performance of a set of nearby intersec-
tions is subordinated to the broader interest of residents regionwide in reaching
                                      ENVISIONING THE ACCESSIBILITY SHIFT        155


destinations. Where incumbent residents will still be concerned about roadway
delay, that local focus will be counterbalanced rather than reinforced and legiti-
mated by the language, models, and regionally scaled metrics of planners.40
    Reform of professional institutions does not come easily. Professions can
retain a vested interest in the status quo that has often served them well, gener-
ating both the need for their services and the flow of resources to pay for them.
Yet the examples of accessibility deployment described in this chapter provide
evidence of a changing professional culture, as did the appearance of accessibil-
ity (albeit as a dimension of mobility) in the venerable Highway Capacity Man-
ual, published in 2016.41 A demonstration of the potential for a thoroughgoing
professional transformation in a transportation organization had occurred two
decades earlier when the Institute of Transportation Engineers, which had previ-
ously been oriented toward rapid roadway travel, gave its imprimatur to traffic
calming, a set of techniques designed specifically to slow cars down.42 Profession-
als in practice frequently need the legitimacy offered by their field’s organizations
before they can alter their practices; professional organizations in transportation
and land-use fields are thus important actors in the accessibility shift, which can
be assisted by three principal approaches.


Bottom-Up
Planners in local and regional practice can inject accessibility thinking, metrics,
and models into day-to-day planning operations. There is some evidence that
this is already occurring.43 This bottom-up shift is more than simple planning
for multimodalism or mixed-use development, as welcome as those innovations
may be. Rather, it is a shifting of the rationale for what constitutes success in
transportation. Cases such as the San Francisco Bicycle Plan are laudable but fail
to challenge the evaluative mobility framework, which impedes new solutions. By
contrast, a shift to accessibility-based thinking could enable a host of innovations
in transportation and land-use practice by redefining success.


Top-Down
The planner who seeks to analyze decisions in accessibility terms is in effect vol-
unteering for extra duty: the norms of mobility-based analysis remain in place
and, because of the lack of mandates, few resources are devoted to accessibility-
based analysis. Thus, observed instances of bottom-up accessibility-based
reform, while important, need bolstering of a different sort. “Top-down” reform
refers to altering the mandates and norms promulgated by state and national
agencies, boards of directors, funding organizations, and professional societies.
156         CONCLUSION


This can generate the requirements for accessibility-based planning, provide
resources, and, importantly, offer professional legitimacy to the would-be acces-
sibility planner.


Outside-In
Sectors including real estate and economic development are keenly aware of the
role of accessibility in shaping outcomes of concern to them. The medical and
public health fields are invested in the ability of patients to reach medical care.
Outside-in reform is based on bridge-building to realms such as these outside of
traditional transportation and land-use planning. The interests of these sectors
naturally align with people’s need to reach valued destinations. For this reason,
they can provide needed support for planning reform.

Reform of analytic frameworks, via any of these routes, can shift outcomes in at
least three ways. First, it can aid in “making the good easy”; that is, it can remove
obstacles to accessibility-increasing transportation investments and land-use
reforms.44 Mobility-based evaluation may not foreclose these options in any
absolute sense, but it impedes accessibility-increasing policies by imposing the
burden of proving that their mobility impacts will not be too onerous. Shift-
ing to accessibility-based evaluation allows these policies to be judged on their
accessibility merits. Second, in the realms of transportation and land use, acces-
sibility can serve as a coordinating principle for policy across multiple agencies
and governmental levels. It can help ensure that policy at various levels does not
work at cross purposes to produce perverse transportation outcomes. Third,
altering the criteria can help shift the broader discourse around transportation
and land use. When a dense development in a high-accessibility location is seen
not as degrading LOS but rather as improving accessibility, public discourse
about what success means in transportation planning is transformed. Such lan-
guage will not be adopted immediately or universally, and it will not resolve
questions pertaining to accessibility for whom, where, and by which modes. But
such language can, over time, shift the thinking of some planning-process par-
ticipants and stakeholders, just as the technical language of mobility has shaped
discourse for decades.



Accessibility and Planning Goals
Mobility language has served planning poorly. Ultimately, planners seek trans-
portation and land-use systems to support thriving cities and regions along
                                      ENVISIONING THE ACCESSIBILITY SHIFT       157


multiple dimensions, including environmental protection, social equity, and
economic development—or the “planner’s triangle.”45 Quite apart from its
mismatch with the purpose of transportation, mobility as a guiding principle
for transportation and land-use planning is mismatched with all three dimen-
sions. By elevating movement—the inherently energy-intensive means of pro-
viding accessibility—to an end, it sidelines the potential roles of proximity and
connectivity in furthering environmental goals. Since mobility is an attribute
of transportation links rather than people, it masks the distributional conse-
quences of transportation decisions and thus impedes social-equity planning.
Economic development is sometimes seen as mobility planning’s forte, but the
driving force behind agglomeration economies, the economic engine of cit-
ies and regions, is not movement per se, but the potential for interaction, or
accessibility.46
    As an alternative to transportation planning’s mobility logic, VKT reduction
fits well with environmental-protection goals but has little to say about either
social equity or economic development. By contrast, the accessibility shift fits
all three corners of the planner’s triangle. Accessibility-based planning holds
the potential to reduce the environmental impact of the transportation sys-
tem by prioritizing proximity and connectivity, which, compared to mobility,
are the less energy-intensive means of supporting interaction. But in contrast
with VKT reduction, accessibility promotion does not limit itself to the austere
value of travel reductions alone. Instead, it aims to augment the capacity of the
built environment to offer a high quality of life by supporting people’s interac-
tion with a range of destinations and the activities available at them. Because
accessibility is an attribute of people and neighborhoods, not of intersections
and freeway links, it is always distributed unevenly between socioeconomic
groups and geographic regions and thus lends itself to equity-based evalua-
tions. The evaluation of accessibility also inherently incorporates dimensions
of the urban economy, since increasing the potential for interaction is the cen-
tral function of cities to begin with. Since knowledge spillovers and benefits
to agglomeration—both products of this interaction—are principal drivers
in economic development, accessibility also supports the planner’s economic-
development goals.
    In none of these realms will the accessibility shift do the job on its own. To
have an impact, changing definitions of transportation and land-use success
need to facilitate reforms in the built environment and the policies that oper-
ate within it. The accessibility shift cannot, in and of itself, provide guidance on
the relative importance to be accorded to accessibility by the various modes; at
different locales; or of people of differing incomes, classes, or races. It cannot
resolve resource conflicts between transportation and other social goods such
158        CONCLUSION


as education, health, or public safety. It amounts to the simple proposition that
when planning aims to gauge and value the benefits of transportation, it will do
so in accessibility rather than in mobility terms. While such a shift cannot pro-
vide the answers for planners and policy makers in their search for better cities
and regions, in the realm of transportation and land-use planning, it can, at long
last, help them ask the right questions.
Appendix A

PROCEDURE FOR ACCESSIBILITY
ANALYSIS FOR LAND-USE PROJECTS




Step 1. Calculate Total Accessibility
for the Region
This method employs a gravity-based accessibility formula to measure total
regional accessibility to all employment (see equation A.1). A more complete
description of this method is available in Transport Policy.1 This measure is
widely used in the research literature and is relatively straightforward to compute
when interzonal travel-time data are available. The Southeast Michigan Council
of Governments provided population and employment counts by traffic-analysis
zone (TAZ) and auto travel times between zones by time of day: a.m. peak, p.m.
peak, and off peak. Based on research that suggests a relationship between met-
ropolitan population size and work travel impedance,2 a range of impedance
coefficients typical for work travel for smaller metropolitan areas was used: 0.10,
0.13, and 0.16, with 0.13 as the default value.
    The accessibility of each zone is a function of the number of destinations
in other zones and the impedance of travel between zones (see equation A.1).
Total regional accessibility is the sum of accessibility from each zone multiplied
by the resident population in each zone. Total accessibility, rather than average
accessibility, is used in this analysis because the effects of population growth are
incorporated at later stages through the elasticity calculation. Total accessibil-
ity necessarily increases with any zonal increase in population or employment,
assuming that travel impedances are held constant.


                                                                       159
160            APPENDIX A



                                     ∑ pa =∑ p ∑ d e
                                                           −0 13t ij
      total accessibility before =                                            (A.1)
                                       i i i   i i   i j


Summing over all zones i, pi is the total residential population in each zone i, and
ai is the accessibility reachable from each zone i. The second part of the equation
further breaks down the accessibility component for each zone i, ai. Each ai is
the sum over zones j of the number of destinations in each zone j, dj, times the
impedance between zones i and j, which here has the negative exponential form
of the travel time from zone i to zone j (tij).



Step 2. Conduct a Traffic-Impact
Analysis for the Development
Local jurisdictions in the United States typically require a traffic-impact analysis
for any sizable development. These analyses forecast additional delay expected
to result from the development. In urban areas, traffic-impact analyses result
in reports of additional seconds of delay for each type of movement through a
set of affected intersections.3 Delays are aggregated up to the intersection level
by weighting each type of intersection movement with the projected number
of trips making that movement, resulting in an average delay for the entire
intersection. Any zone-to-zone route that is expected to traverse this particular
intersection is assigned this additional aggregated delay, as described in the
next step.



Step 3. Update Regional Travel Pattern
Data Based on Information from the
Traffic-Impact Analysis
Intersection-level delays from the previous step are assigned to zone-to-zone
travel times via a routing procedure.4 This is completed by calculating the
route from every TAZ to every other TAZ and identifying which routes run
through the affected intersections. If a TAZ-to-TAZ route runs through an
affected intersection, its travel time is updated to include the intersection-level
delay. In addition, if the shortest route no longer runs through an affected
intersection, the routing procedure identifies the updated fastest route. This
computationally intensive procedure is implemented with programming and
makes use of open-source mapping and routing data. The result is a set of
new zone-to-zone travel times taking into account the delays added by the
proposed development.
                                           PROCEDURE FOR ACCESSIBILITY ANALYSIS                                    161


Step 4. Change Regional Land-Use Data
Based on Information from
the Development
Given the proposed development’s location and size, either population or
employment can be added to the appropriate zone. Translation of housing units
into a population change is accomplished on the basis of census data on average
household size for each particular type of housing unit within the development.
To convert retail development size into employment totals, the Planners Estimat-
ing Guide suggests that each retail job requires approximately 47 square meters
(510 square feet) of space.5
    With new forecast information on land-use and transportation patterns that will
result after the project, a new, “after” total regional accessibility can be calculated.
The same gravity accessibility formula is used, but with new travel times, popula-
tion, and employment (as destination activities) information (see equation A.2).
    In most cases, the total accessibility after will be higher, because additional
population (or employment) has been added. However, an increase in total
accessibility does not necessarily imply an improvement in average accessibil-
ity. The accessibility gain must be compared with the size of the development to
examine its effect on the average. This is the purpose of the next step, calculating
accessibility elasticity.

                                                                          (            ) d
   total accessibility after      ∑ ( p + Δp )∑ e
                                      i     i           i       i
                                                                    −0 13 t ij Δt ij
                                                                                        (j      dj   )            (A.2)

Total accessibility after is the sum over all zones i of the new population in each
zone i (pi + Δpi) times the accessibility available from each zone i. The new acces-
sibility for each zone i is the sum of the new destination totals (dj + Δdj) times
                                    −0 13(t ij Δt ij )
the new travel time impedances e                       .



Step 5. Calculate the Accessibility Elasticity
Accessibility elasticity is computed as the proportional change in accessibility
divided by the proportional change in regional size. Regional size is measured
either by population or employment. The formula for accessibility elasticity
appears in equation A.3. The accessibility elasticity score minus 1 yields the per-
centage by which the development outperforms or underperforms the current
average accessibility of the region.


   accessibility elasticity =
                                          ( access   after
                                                                                )
                                                             − accessbefore / accessbefore
                                                                                                                  (A.3)
                                ( population    after
                                                        − population          before
                                                                                       ) / population    before
TABLE A.4A.      Metropolitan regions included in the study
REGION                             POPULATION RANK            2009 MSA POPULATION

New York                                  1                      19,069,796
Los Angeles                               2                      12,874,797
Chicago                                   3                       9,580,567
Dallas                                    4                       6,447,615
Philadelphia                              5                       5,968,252
Houston                                   6                       5,867,489
Washington, DC                            8                       5,476,241
Atlanta                                   9                       5,475,213
Boston                                   10                       4,588,680
Detroit                                  11                       4,403,437
Phoenix                                  12                       4,364,094
San Francisco                            13                       4,317,853
Seattle                                  15                       3,407,848
Minneapolis                              16                       3,269,814
San Diego                                17                       3,053,793
Baltimore                                20                       2,690,886
Denver                                   21                       2,552,195
Portland                                 23                       2,241,841
Cincinnati                               24                       2,171,896
Cleveland                                26                       2,091,286
Orlando                                  27                       2,082,421
San Antonio                              28                       2,072,128
Kansas City                              29                       2,067,585
Las Vegas                                30                       1,902,834
Columbus                                 32                       1,801,848
Charlotte                                33                       1,745,524
Indianapolis                             34                       1,743,658
Virginia Beach                           36                       1,674,498
Nashville                                38                       1,582,264
Memphis                                  41                       1,304,926
Louisville                               42                       1,258,577
Richmond                                 43                       1,238,187
Oklahoma City                            44                       1,227,278
Hartford                                 45                       1,195,998
New Orleans                              46                       1,189,981
Buffalo                                  50                       1,123,804
Rochester                                51                       1,035,566
Tucson                                   52                       1,020,200
                               x               x                   x
                   x                   x                   x
                       x       x                                               x                                                                Destinations
          x                                    x                       x                                     Radius        Area      Density         or
                                       x                       x                        x                                                       accessibility
                                                       r
         x x                   x                                                   x
                                           x                                                     Smaller       r           πr2       10/πr2         10
          x                x                                           x            x             circle
     x                                                 x                           2r            Larger
               x                       x               x                   x                                   2r          4πr2      10/πr2         40
                                                                                                  circle
         x             x                                       x               x
               x               x                   x                   x
                           x                           x



FIGURE A.4A. Illustration of speed effect of accessibility (holding
destinations constant). One “x” represents one destination.




               x                           x
                                   x
                                               r
         x                                                     x
                           x
         x                                                 x                                                                                   Destinations
                                                                                                    Radius          Area          Density           or
                       x                                                                                                                       accessibility
                                           x
                                                                                         Top          r             πr2           10/πr2           10
                                                                                        circle
                           x
               x                           x                                           Bottom
                                               x                                                      r             πr2           20/πr2           20
                                   x                                                    circle
     x                                         r
         x                                                     x
                       x
                           x
 x                                         x                   x
         x                     x                           x
                       x                   x



FIGURE A.4B. Illustration of density effect of accessibility (holding speeds
constant). One “x” represents one destination.
164            APPENDIX A


                                             Urban area population

                                                           0.629

                                            Urban area density

                     –0.537
                                          –0.448

      Total freeway lane              Total daily
       miles per capita              VMT per capita

                                                                         0.587
          –1.145                  0.746

                   Daily VMT to freeway
                      lane miles ratio

                         –0.440

  Highway       0.492         Weighted average                                   Proximity
 speed limit                     auto speed


                           0.271                                     0.720




                                                   Accessibility

FIGURE A.4C.            Path analysis of relationships of density, speed, proximity, and
accessibility


  Variables in figure A.4c are defined as follows:

  Urban area density: Population of the urbanized area divided by its total
     land area in square kilometers, retrieved from Highway Statistics 2008 by
     the Federal Highway Administration.6
  Proximity: Median gravity-based work accessibility index when distance
     between origins and workplace destinations (rather than travel time) is
     used as the metric of impedance.
  Accessibility: Median accessibility score for residents in the region, calculated
     as a gravity model with peak-period travel time by automobile between
     origins and workplace destinations used as the metric of impedance.
  Highway speed limit: The speed limit of the state or territory to which each
     region belongs. Among the 38 MPOs in the study, this variable takes one
     of three values: 65 mph, 70 mph, or 75 mph.
                                  PROCEDURE FOR ACCESSIBILITY ANALYSIS         165


   Total daily VMT per capita: Total daily vehicle-miles traveled by the residents
      of the region divided by the total population of the region, retrieved from
      Highway Statistics 2008 by the Federal Highway Administration.
   Total freeway lane miles per capita: Total freeway lane miles within the
      region divided by the total population of the region, retrieved from High-
      way Statistics 2008 by the Federal Highway Administration.
   Total daily VMT to total lane miles ratio: Total daily VMT per capita divided
      by total freeway lane miles per capita.
   Weighted average auto speed: The average speed, weighted by the imputed
      travel volume share for the corresponding zonal pair.7

    The values represented along each link in the figure are standardized regres-
sion coefficients, a measure of the strength of the relationship between the vari-
ables shown in the diagram. The dependent variable of each regression equation
is the variable to which an arrow points. Independent variables are those repre-
sented as pointing toward the dependent variable. For example, “weighted aver-
age auto speed” is the dependent variable in a regression with “highway speed
limit” and “daily VMT to total lane miles ratio” as the independent variables.
    In a path analysis (appendix A, fig. 4.c), weights along sequential paths are
multiplied to calculate the weight (or strength of relationship) along the entire
link; weights of parallel paths are summed. Thus, the weight from density to
speed is calculated as:

   [(–0.537*–1.145) + (–0.448*0.746)]*(–0.440) = –0.123

As predicted, this link is weak relative to the other links shown in the figure,
because it incorporates two countervailing factors: low-density regions are
freeway-rich on a per-capita basis, but these regions simultaneously demonstrate
high VMT per capita.
   The net effect of density on accessibility is the sum of the positive effect via
higher proximity and the negative effect via slower speeds. The effect of density
on accessibility can be analyzed by comparing the composite weight along the
right-hand path (via proximity) and the left-hand path (via speed). The weight
along the entire speed path equals

   (–0.123*0.271) = –0.033,

while that along the proximity path equals

   (0.587*0.720) = 0.423.
TABLE A.5A.      Metropolitan area summary data, in rank order of public-transport accessibility (2014)
METRO AREA          TIME-WEIGHTED JOB        85TH-PERCENTILE 30-MINUTE JOB   POPULATION     RAIL VRM     BUS VRM      PERCENT IN    FIT INDEX   GINI INDEX
                 ACCESSIBILITY VIA TRANSIT     ACCESSIBILITY VIA TRANSIT      (MILLIONS)   PER CAPITA   PER CAPITA   HIGH DENSITY

New York                 47,536                       210,186                   19.0         27.9         16.9         31.8%         0.34         0.81
San Francisco            14,400                         65,246                   4.4         19.1         15.0           5.6%        0.22         0.76
Los Angeles              11,811                         43,430                  13.0          2.5         18.1           3.8%        0.15         0.67
Washington               11,505                         47,759                   5.6         14.5         18.3           2.5%        0.17         0.83
Chicago                  11,418                         48,116                   9.4         12.3         13.4           3.3%        0.17         0.80
Boston                   11,015                         49,237                   4.5         11.7         11.8           4.4%        0.30         0.81
Philadelphia              7,845                         35,217                   6.0          7.7         12.8           4.0%        0.14         0.80
Seattle                   6,598                         26,141                   3.5          3.0         27.4           0.8%        0.28         0.81
Denver                    5,466                         20,467                   2.6          4.1         16.3           0.1%        0.13         0.71
San Jose                  5,076                         16,441                   1.9          2.9         11.0           0.4%        0.13         0.51
Portland                  4,858                         18,723                   2.3          3.8         14.3           0.1%        0.22         0.70
Milwaukee                 4,735                         19,216                   1.6          0.0         14.3           0.2%        0.36         0.67
Minneapolis               4,476                         17,651                   3.3          1.1         14.8           0.2%        0.36         0.78
Baltimore                 4,226                         14,633                   2.8          3.7         13.5           1.0%        0.14         0.82
Miami                     4,000                         15,333                   5.6          2.5         14.7           1.7%        0.07         0.67
Houston                   3,940                         15,166                   5.9          0.2         12.1           0.4%        0.04         0.81
Salt Lake City            3,824                         13,733                   1.1          7.4         11.3           0.0%        0.21         0.61
San Diego                 3,536                         12,752                   3.0          3.4         14.6           0.8%        0.26         0.65
Phoenix                   2,936                          9,981                   4.3          0.6          9.7           0.1%        0.08         0.70
Sacramento                2,898                         11,052                   2.2          1.8          7.2           0.0%        0.15         0.73
Dallas                    2,846                         10,113                   6.5          1.7          8.3           0.5%        0.02         0.76
Pittsburgh                2,779                         12,268                   2.4          2.0         13.3           0.0%        0.15         0.84
San Antonio               2,650                          9,849                   2.2          0.0         15.0           0.0%        0.15         0.74
Las Vegas                 2,626                          8,162                   2.0          1.4         12.7           0.4%        0.06         0.66
Buffalo                         2,486                             10,432                        1.1              0.9              9.0        0.0%            0.28           0.67
Cleveland                       2,266                               8,372                       2.1              1.9            10.7         0.2%            0.14           0.71
Columbus                        2,233                               9,506                       1.9              0.0              8.5        0.2%            0.12           0.77
St. Louis                       2,184                               7,804                       2.8              2.2            10.4         0.0%            0.14           0.76
Hartford                        2,137                               9,768                       1.2              0.0              9.5        0.3%            0.29           0.77
Atlanta                         1,910                               6,995                       5.4              3.3              8.6        0.0%            0.08           0.87
Providence                      1,871                               8,252                       1.7              0.0              9.6        0.4%            0.22           0.69
New Orleans                     1,844                               8,364                       1.2              0.8              6.7        0.2%            0.13           0.71
Tampa                           1,746                               6,865                       2.8              0.0              8.7        0.1%            0.04           0.69
Detroit                         1,736                               6,373                       4.3              0.1              7.1        0.0%            0.03           0.62
Charlotte                       1,672                               6,541                       1.8              0.5            11.9         0.0%            0.09           0.84
Louisville                      1,639                               6,509                       1.3              0.0            10.0         0.0%            0.22           0.78
Kansas City                     1,624                               6,696                       2.1              0.2              7.0        0.0%            0.15           0.74
Indianapolis                    1,607                               6,263                       1.7              0.0              5.9        0.0%            0.09           0.76
Austin                          1,590                               7,001                       1.8              0.2            11.0         0.4%            0.15           0.83
Raleigh                         1,432                               6,372                       1.2              0.0              7.2        0.0%            0.02           0.83
Cincinnati                      1,421                               5,792                       2.1              0.0              7.9        0.0%            0.21           0.79
Orlando                         1,329                               4,921                       1.9              0.1            13.4         0.0%            0.02           0.74
Nashville                       1,250                               5,232                       1.6              0.1              6.4        0.0%            0.08           0.85
Virginia Beach                  1,200                               4,784                       1.7              0.2              9.3        0.0%            0.07           0.64
Riverside                       1,105                               4,346                       4.1              0.5              6.2        0.0%            0.25           0.61
Birmingham                        705                               2,828                       1.1              0.0              4.1        0.0%            0.03           0.82

Sources: Andrew Owen and David M. Levinson, Access Across America: Transit 2014 Data (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Digital Conservancy, 2014), retrieved from http://dx.doi.
org/10.13020/D6MW2Q; Federal Transit Administration, National Transit Database (Washington, DC, 2014), retrieved from https://www.transit.dot.gov/ntd; Minnesota Population Center,
National Historical Geographic Information System (2011).
Note: Rail is defined as synonymous with the NTD’s fixed-guideway service, and bus is defined as the NTD’s non-fixed-guideway service.
TABLE A.7A. Correspondence between NHTS travel purposes and NAICS job
classifications
NHTS TRIP PURPOSES/NAICS JOB CLASSIFICATION                            PERCENT OF NONWORK TRIPS


Buy goods: groceries/clothing/hardware store; shopping                 28.8
  New car dealers; used car dealers, motorcycle, ATV, and
  personal watercraft dealers; boat dealers; all other motor
  vehicle dealers; automotive parts and accessories stores;
  tire dealers; furniture stores; floor covering stores; window
  treatment stores; all other home furnishings stores;
  household appliance stores; radio, television, and other
  electronics stores; computer and software stores; camera
  and photographic supplies stores; home centers; paint and
  wallpaper stores; hardware stores; other building material
  dealers; outdoor power equipment stores; nursery, garden
  center, and farm supply stores; supermarkets and other
  grocery (except convenience) stores; convenience stores;
  meat markets; fish and seafood markets; fruit and vegetable
  markets; baked goods stores; confectionery and nut stores;
  all other specialty food stores; beer, wine, and liquor stores;
  pharmacies and drugstores; cosmetics, beauty supplies,
  and perfume stores; optical goods stores; food (health)
  supplement stores; all other health and personal care stores;
  men’s clothing stores; women’s clothing stores; children’s
  and infants’ clothing stores; family clothing stores; clothing
  accessories stores; other clothing stores; shoe stores; jewelry
  stores; luggage and leather goods stores; sporting goods
  stores; hobby, toy, and game stores; sewing, needlework, and
  piece goods stores; musical instrument and supplies stores;
  book stores, news dealers and newsstands; prerecorded
  tape, compact disc, and record stores; department stores
  (except discount department stores); discount department
  stores; warehouse clubs and supercenters; all other general
  merchandise stores; florists, office supplies and stationery
  stores; gift, novelty, and souvenir stores; used merchandise
  stores; art dealers; manufactured (mobile) home dealers;
  tobacco stores; all other miscellaneous store retailers (except
  tobacco stores)
Get/eat meal; meals; social event                                      12.9
  Full-service restaurants; limited-service restaurants; cafeterias,
  grill buffets, and buffets; mobile food services
Visit friends/relatives                                                11.3
  Population (rather than NAICS codes) is considered as the
  number of destinations in this category.
NHTS TRIP PURPOSES/NAICS JOB CLASSIFICATION                             PERCENT OF NONWORK TRIPS


Go to gym/exercise/play sports                                          7.1
  Golf courses and country clubs; skiing facilities; fitness and
  recreational sports centers; bowling centers
Buy services: video rentals/dry cleaner/post office/car service/bank    7.0
  Postal service; couriers and express delivery services;
  commercial banking; savings institutions; credit unions; other
  depository credit intermediation; consumer lending; mortgage
  and nonmortgage loan brokers; consumer electronics and
  appliances rental; formal wear and costume rental; video tape
  and disc rental; general rental centers; general automotive repair;
  automotive exhaust system repair; automotive transmission
  repair; other automotive mechanical and electrical repair and
  maintenance; automotive body, paint, and interior repair and
  maintenance; automotive glass replacement shops; automotive
  oil change and lubrication shops; car washes; all other
  automotive repair and maintenance; consumer electronics repair
  and maintenance; computer and office machine repair and
  maintenance; communication equipment repair and maintenance;
  other electronic and precision equipment repair and maintenance;
  home and garden equipment repair and maintenance; appliance
  repair and maintenance; reupholstery and furniture repair;
  footwear and leather goods repair; other personal and household
  goods repair and maintenance; coin-operated laundries and
  drycleaners; drycleaning and laundry services (except coin-
  operated); pet care (except veterinary) services; photofinishing
  laboratories (except one-hour); one-hour photofinishing
Go to school as student                                                 6.5
  Elementary and secondary schools; junior colleges, colleges,
  universities, and professional schools; business and secretarial
  schools; computer training; professional and management
  development training; cosmetology and barber schools; flight
  training; apprenticeship training; other technical and trade
  schools; fine arts schools; sports and recreation instruction;
  language schools; exam preparation and tutoring; automobile
  driving schools; all other miscellaneous schools and instruction;
  educational support services
Go to religious activity and school/religious activity                  4.9
  Funeral homes and funeral services; cemeteries and
  crematories; religious organizations

                                                                                     (Continued)
TABLE A.7A.         Continued
NHTS TRIP PURPOSES/NAICS JOB CLASSIFICATION                                 PERCENT OF NONWORK TRIPS

Go out/hang out: entertainment/theater/sports event/bar                     4.3
  Motion picture theaters (except drive-ins); drive-in motion
  picture theaters; theater companies and dinner theaters; dance
  companies, musical groups and artists; other performing arts
  companies; sports teams and clubs; racetracks; other spectator
  sports; amusement and theme parks; amusement arcades;
  casinos (except casino hotels); other gambling industries;
  marinas; all other amusement and recreation industries; drinking
  places (alcoholic beverages)
Buy gas                                                                     3.4
  Gasoline stations with convenience stores; other gasoline stations
Family personal business/obligations                                        3.2
  Offices of real estate agents and brokers; offices of real estate
  appraisers; other activities related to real estate; passenger car
  rental; offices of notaries; title abstract and settlement offices;
  architectural services; landscape architectural services; building
  inspection services; interior design services; photography
  studios, portrait; employment placement agencies; temporary
  help services; travel agencies; investigation services; solid
  waste landfill; labor unions and similar labor organizations;
  political organizations; other similar organizations (except
  business, professional, labor, and political organizations); courts;
  police protection; legal counsel and prosecution; correctional
  institutions; parole offices and probation offices
Medical/dental services                                                     2.9
  Offices of physicians (except mental health specialists); mental
  health specialists; offices of dentists; offices of chiropractors;
  offices of optometrists; offices of mental health practitioners
  (except physicians); offices of physical, occupational and speech
  therapists, and audiologists; offices of podiatrists; offices of all
  other miscellaneous health practitioners; family planning centers;
  outpatient mental health and substance abuse centers; HMO
  medical centers; kidney dialysis centers; freestanding ambulatory
  surgical and emergency centers; all other outpatient care centers;
  medical laboratories; diagnostic imaging centers; home health
  care services; ambulance services; blood and organ banks; all
  other miscellaneous ambulatory health care services; general
  medical and surgical hospitals; psychiatric and substance abuse
  hospitals; specialty (except psychiatric and substance abuse)
  hospitals; nursing care facilities; residential mental retardation
  facilities; residential mental health and substance abuse facilities;
  continuing care retirement communities; homes for the elderly;
  other residential care facilities; services for the elderly and persons
  with disabilities; other individual and family services; emergency
  and other relief services; vocational rehabilitation services
NHTS TRIP PURPOSES/NAICS JOB CLASSIFICATION                            PERCENT OF NONWORK TRIPS

Coffee/ice cream/snacks                                                1.4
  Snack and nonalcoholic beverage bars
Visit public place: historical site/museum/park/library; go to         1.3
  library: school related
  Libraries and archives; museums; historical sites; zoos and
  botanical gardens; nature parks and other similar institutions
Day care                                                               1.0
  Child day care services
Rest or relaxation/vacation                                            1.0
  Scheduled passenger air transportation; nonscheduled
  chartered passenger air transportation; deep-sea passenger
  transportation; coastal and Great Lakes passenger
  transportation; inland water passenger transportation; scenic
  and sightseeing transportation, land; scenic and sightseeing
  transportation, water; scenic and sightseeing transportation,
  other; tour operators; convention and visitors bureaus;
  hotels (except casino hotels) and motels; casino hotels; bed-
  and-breakfast inns; all other traveler accommodations; RV
  (recreational vehicle) parks and campgrounds; recreational and
  vacation camps (except campgrounds)
Attend meeting: PTA/home owners association/local government           1.0
  Civic and social organizations; legislative bodies; executive
  and legislative offices, combined; American Indian and Alaska
  native tribal governments; other general government support;
  other justice, public order, and safety activities; administration
  of public health programs; administration of human resources
  programs (except education, public health, and Veterans Affairs
  programs); Administration of Veterans Affairs; Administration
  of Housing programs; Administration of Urban Planning and
  Community and Rural Development; Administration of General
  Economic Programs; regulation, licensing, and inspection of
  miscellaneous commercial sectors
Pet care: walk the dog/vet visits                                      0.9
  Pet and pet supplies stores; veterinary services
Use personal services: grooming/haircut/nails                          0.5
  Barber shops, beauty salons, nail salons, diet and weight-
  reducing centers, other personal care services
Use professional services: attorney/accountant                         0.5
  Offices of lawyers, all other legal services, offices of certified
  public accountants, tax preparation services, other accounting
  services
Appendix B

VARIABLES USED IN THE TEXT




VARIABLE NAME OR SYMBOL                                          DESCRIPTION

Nm                                            Estimated number of nonwork trips for
                                                metropolitan region m
85th-percentile 30-minute job accessibility   The average number of jobs reachable within
      via transit                               30 minutes of travel time by public transport
                                                at the 85th percentile of the regional
                                                accessibility distribution
aai                                           Accessibility index for travel by automobile for
                                                zone i
ati                                           Accessibility index for travel by public transport
                                                for zone i
Accessibility                                 Median accessibility score for residents in
                                                the region, calculated as a gravity model
                                                with peak-period travel time by automobile
                                                between origins and workplace destinations
                                                used as the metric of impedance
ai                                            Accessibility of each zone i
Aregion                                       Total regional population-weighted accessibility
                                                to jobs
dj                                            Destinations in each zone j

                                                                                     (Continued)




                                                                                 173
VARIABLE NAME OR SYMBOL                      DESCRIPTION

Er                        The share of all national nonwork trips for
                            purpose r
f(tij)                    Impedance between zones i and j
fij                       Flow of vehicles from zone i to zone j over the
                            peak hour
Fit Index                 A dimensionless index that measures the
                            correlation between block-level 30-minute
                            public-transport accessibility and block-level
                            gross population density
Gini Index                A dimensionless index that measures the
                            evenness of the distribution of public-
                            transport accessibility across the regional
                            population
gj                        Total number of jobs located in zone j
hi                        The number of households residing in zone i
Highway speed limit       The speed limit of the state or territory to which
                            each region belongs
i                         Zonal index, residential zones
j                         Zonal index, destination zones
Jir                       The number of jobs in zone i associated with
                            trip purpose r
Jm                        Number of jobs in metropolitan region m
MLMR                      Mode-location match ratio
Nm                        Estimated number of nonwork trips for
                            metropolitan region m
Nr                        The number of nonwork trips in a metropolitan
                            region for trip purpose r
Percent in high density   Share of the regional population living in
                            densities higher than 60 persons per gross
                            acre
pi                        Total residential population in each zone i
Population                Total regional population
Proximity                 Median gravity-based work accessibility index
                            when distance between origins and workplace
                            destinations (rather than travel time) is used
                            as the metric of impedance
Rail VRM per capita       Rail service deployed, in per-capita vehicle-
                            revenue miles (VRM) for rail modes
sai                       Share of the region’s automobile-owning
                            households located in zone i
sti                       Share of the region’s transit-dependent
                            households located in zone i



             174
VARIABLE NAME OR SYMBOL                                          DESCRIPTION

T                                             Aggregate regional sum of peak-hour travel
                                                times
tij                                           Travel cost/time from zone i to j
Time-weighted job accessibility via transit   A weighted-average accessibility score for each
                                                metropolitan area based on the average
                                                number of jobs that are reachable by public
                                                transport within 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, and 60
                                                minutes
Total daily VMT per capita                    Total daily vehicle-miles traveled by the
                                                residents of the region divided by the total
                                                population of the region
Urban area density                            Population of the urbanized area divided by its
                                                total land area in square kilometers
Weighted average auto speed                   The average speed, weighted by the imputed
                                                travel volume share for the corresponding
                                                zonal pair
Wi                                            The nonwork attractiveness index at zone i




                                                                                  175
Notes




INTRODUCTION
      1. Noah Kazis, a former writer for Streetsblog, offers a particularly apt example to
illustrate the same point: “Imagine two drivers leaving downtown to head home. Each
of them sits in traffic for the first ten miles of the commute but at that point, their paths
diverge. The first one has reached home. The second has another twenty miles to drive,
though luckily for her, the roads are clear and congestion doesn’t slow her down. Who’s
got a better commute?” Most metrics of mobility—average speeds, percent of congested
travel, peak-to-off-peak travel-time ratio, buffer index (the percent of travel time needed
to ensure an on-time arrival)—would (perversely) assess the second driver to have the
superior commute. Noah Kazis, “Report: Want to Ease Commuter Pain? Highways
and Sprawl Won’t Help,” Streetsblog NYC, September 29, 2010, http://nyc.streetsblog.
org/2010/09/29/report-want-to-ease-commuter-pain-highways-and-sprawl-wont-help/.
      2. In other contexts, “accessibility” focuses on accommodating the needs of people
with a range of abilities and is focused on building and facility design. By contrast, the
use here pertains to the ability to reach destinations in a city or region and is focused on
transportation and land use.
      3. Reid Ewing,” Measuring Transportation Performance,” Transportation Quarterly
49, no. 1 (1995): 91–104.
      4. David Schrank et al., 2015 Urban Mobility Scorecard (College Station: Texas Trans-
portation Institute, Texas A&M University, 2015).
      5. Edward Weiner, Urban Transportation Planning in the United States: A Historic
Overview (Westport, CT: Praeger, 1999).
      6. Nathaniel Baum-Snow, “Did Highways Cause Suburbanization?,” Quarterly Jour-
nal of Economics 122, no. 2 (2007): 775–805; Paul Waddell et al., “Modeling Interde-
pendence in Household Residence and Workplace Choices,” Transportation Research
Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, no. 2003 (2007): 84–92; Transporta-
tion Research Board, Expanding Metropolitan Highways: Implications for Air Quality and
Energy Use, Special Report 245 (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 1995).
      7. Michael D. Meyer and Eric J. Miller, Urban Transportation Planning: A Decision-
Oriented Approach, 2nd ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001).
      8. Peter R. Stopher and Arnim H. Meyburg, Urban Transportation Modeling and
Planning (Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1975); Edward K. Morlok, Introduction to
Transportation Engineering and Planning (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1978); Meyer and
Miller, Urban Transportation Planning.
      9. Robert B. Mitchell and Chester Rapkin, Urban Traffic: A Function of Land Use
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1954).
    10. Avijit Ghosh and C. Samuel Craig, “Formulating Retail Location Strategy in a
Changing Environment,” Journal of Marketing 47, no. 3 (1983): 53–68.
    11. Hongbo Du and Corinne Mulley, “Relationship between Transport Accessibil-
ity and Land Value: Local Model Approach with Geographically Weighted Regression,”
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, no. 1977
(2006): 197–205; Andy L. Krause and Christopher Bitter, “Spatial Econometrics, Land
Values, and Sustainability: Trends in Real Estate Valuation Research,” supplement, Cities

                                                                              177
178         NOTES TO PAGES 5–13


29, no. 2 (2012): S19–25; Paul Cheshire and Stephen Sheppard, “On the Price of Land and
the Value of Amenities,” Economica 62, no. 246 (1995): 247–67.
    12. Jonathan Levine, Zoned Out: Regulations, Market, and Choices in Transportation
and Metropolitan Land Use (Washington, DC: Resources for the Future, 2006).
    13. For consistency with international terminology, we use metric units, except when
quoting other documents or referring to data sources that employ Imperial units.
    14. Ilan Salomon and Patricia L. Mokhtarian, “What Happens When Mobility-Inclined
Market Segments Face Accessibility-Enhancing Policies?,” Transportation Research Part D
3, no. 3 (1998): 129–40; Gerald L. Houseman, The Right of Mobility (Port Washington,
NY: Kennikat Press, 1979), 19.
    15. Susan L. Handy and Deb A. Niemeier, “Measuring Accessibility: An Exploration
of Issues and Alternatives,” Environment and Planning A 29, no. 7 (1997): 1176; Derek
Halden, “Using Accessibility Measures to Integrate Land Use and Transport Policy in
Edinburgh and the Lothians,” Transport Policy 9, no. 4 (2002): 314.
    16. Petter Naess, “‘New Urbanism’ or Metropolitan-Level Centralization?: A Com-
parison of the Influences of Metropolitan-Level and Neighborhood-Level Urban Form
Characteristics on Travel Behavior,” Journal of Transport and Land Use 4, no. 1 (2011):
25–44.
    17. Martin Wachs and T. Gordon Kumagai, “Physical Accessibility as a Social Indica-
tor,” Socio-Economic Planning Sciences 7, no. 5 (1973): 439.
    18. Jean-Paul Rodrigue, Claude Comtois, and Brian Slack. The Geography of Transport
System (New York: Routledge, 2009), 54.
    19. Irene Casas, “Evaluating the Importance of Accessibility to Congestion Response
Using a GIS-Based Travel Simulator,” Journal of Geographical Systems 5, no. 1 (2003): 110.
    20. Transportation Research Board, Highway Capacity Manual 2010, http://hcm.trb.
org/?qr=1.
    21. WNYC Average Commute Times, from the 2006–10. U.S. Census Bureau’s Ameri-
can Community Survey five-year estimates, https://project.wnyc.org/commute-times-us/
embed.html.
    22. Yingling Fan, “Household Structure and Gender Differences in Travel Time:
Spouse/Partner Presence, Parenthood, and Breadwinner Status,” Transportation 44, no. 2
(2017): 271–91.
    23. Robert M. Haig, Major Economic Factors in Metropolitan Growth and Its Arrange-
ment: A Study of Trends and Tendencies in the Economic Activities within the Region of
New York and Its Environs (New York: Committee on Regional Plan of New York and Its
Environs, 1927); Walter G. Hansen, “How Accessibility Shapes Land Use,” Journal of the
American Planning Association 25, no. 2 (1959): 73–76.
    24. Geneviève Boisjoly and Ahmed M. El-Geneidy, “How to Get There?: A Critical
Assessment of Accessibility Objectives and Indicators in Metropolitan Transportation
Plans,” Transport Policy 55 (2017): 38–50.
    25. Karst T. Geurs and Bert van Wee, “Accessibility Evaluation of Land-Use and
Transport Strategies: Review and Research Directions,” Journal of Transport Geography
12, no. 2 (2004): 127–40.
    26. Transportation Research Board, Driving and the Built Environment: The Effects of
Compact Development on Motorized Travel, Energy Use, and CO2 Emissions (Washington,
DC: National Academies Press, 2009); Transportation Research Board, Highway Capacity
Manual 2010, http://hcm.trb.org/?qr=1.
    27. Institute of Transportation Engineers, Transportation Impact Analyses for Site
Development: An ITE Recommended Practice (Washington, DC, 2010).
    28. Gilles Duranton and Erick Guerra, Developing a Common Narrative on Urban
Accessibility: An Urban Planning Perspective (Washington DC: Brookings, 2016).
                                                           NOTES TO PAGES 13–20            179


    29. Bent Flyvbjerg, Making Social Science Matter: Why Social Inquiry Fails and How It
Can Succeed Again (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2001).
    30. José Moore, Karen Lucas, and John Bates, Social Disadvantage and Transport in
the UK: A Trip-Based Approach (Oxford: Transport Studies Unit, University of Oxford,
2013).
    31. Bert van Wee and Karst T. Geurs, “The Role of Accessibility in Urban and Trans-
port Planning,” in Handbook on Transport and Urban Planning in the Developed World,
ed. Michiel C. J. Bleimer, Corinne Mulley, and Claudine J. Moutou (Cheltenham, UK:
Edward Elgar, 2016), 55–59.
    32. While the accessibility shift pertains to all transportation modes, pedestrianism
and cycling pose their own challenges for accessibility analysis, including the sparseness
of available data and the prominence of difficult-to-measure safety and amenities in active
transportation. These issues are beyond the scope of this book. Yet, even in the case of
walking or cycling, there exist mobility and accessibility approaches to planning. For
example, the Highway Capacity Manual’s assessments of level of service for nonmotor-
ized facilities are based on pedestrian space (square feet of facility per pedestrian); bicycle-
pedestrian meetings and passings per hour (a measure of potential interference on shared
facilities); and, for bike facilities, meetings and active passings per minute, presence of a
centerline, path width, and delayed passings. All these measure the quality of movement
but shed no light on the ability of pedestrians and cyclists to reach destinations; an ample
path that failed to offer any destinations within walking or cycling distance would still
receive top scores. By contrast, shifting to accessibility in active transportation implies a
move to a destination focus, which, for many walking and cycling facilities, would include
recreation as a destination.
    33. Derek Halden, “The Use and Abuse of Accessibility Measures in UK Passenger
Transport Planning,” Research in Transportation Business & Management 2 (2011): 12–19;
Karel Martens, Transport Justice: Designing Fair Transportation Systems (New York: Rout-
ledge, 2017).
    34. Charles E. Lindblom, “The Science of ‘Muddling Through,’” Public Administration
Review 19, no. 2 (1959): 79–88.
1. WHAT IS TRANSPORTATION FOR?
      1. Jules Dupuit, “On the Measurement of the Utility of Public Works,” in Readings in
Welfare Economics, by Kenneth J. Arrow and Tibor Scitovsky (Homewood, IL: Richard D.
Irwin, 1969), selected by a committee of the American Economic Association, translated
in International Economic Papers 2 (1952): 83–110, English translation by R. H. Barback
from “De la Mesure de l’Utilité des Travaux Publics,” Annales des Ponts et Chausées, 2nd
ser., vol. 8, 1844; Augustin Cournot, Researches into the Mathematical Principles of the
Theory of Wealth, trans. Nathaniel T. Bacon with a Bibliography of Mathematical Eco-
nomics by Irving Fisher (1838; repr. New York: MacMillan, 1897).
      2. Alfred Marshall, Principles of Economics (New York: Macmillan, 1895).
      3. Michael R. Bonavia, The Economics of Transport (London: Cambridge at the Uni-
versity Press, 1936), 4.
      4. Paul A. Samuelson, “The Pure Theory of Public Expenditure,” Review of Economics
and Statistics 36, no. 4 (1954): 387–89.
      5. Bonavia, Economics of Transport, 4.
      6. Mitchell and Rapkin, Urban Traffic.
      7. Mitchell and Rapkin’s terms for the concept of derived demand in transportation
were not as direct as those in use today. They clearly subordinated the trip to the desire to
reach the destination. But like many seminal works viewed from the perspective of time, the
book’s treatment of its topic is more oblique than is generally remembered: “Psychological
180           NOTES TO PAGES 20–24


analysis of travel motivations might include study of the formation of a tension within
an individual (whether conscious or not) which he hopes to satisfy in the course of a trip,
and the translation of this tension into an action decision. The decision process by which
goal events and intended destinations are chosen should be explored. Attention should
be given to the cognitive aspects of the potential destinations (locations or general locali-
ties where an individual is aware, believes or hopes that a goal event can occur) that are
considered by the individual in choosing an intended destination.” Mitchell and Rapkin,
Urban Traffic, 54.
      8. Mitchell, and Rapkin, Urban Traffic, 55.
      9. Mitchell, and Rapkin, Urban Traffic, 105.
    10. Patricia L. Mokhtarian and Ilan Salomon, “How Derived Is the Demand for
Travel?: Some Conceptual and Measurement Considerations,” Transportation Research
Part A 35, no. 8 (2001): 695–719; Lothlorien S. Redmond and Patricia L. Mokhtarian,
“The Positive Utility of the Commute: Modeling Ideal Commute Time and Relative
Desired Commute Amount,” Transportation 28, no. 2 (2001): 179–205; Salomon and
Mokhtarian, “Mobility-Inclined Market.”
     11. Mokhtarian and Salomon, “How Derived Is the Demand for Travel?,” 698.
     12. Wachs and Kumagai, “Physical Accessibility as a Social Indicator,” 439.
    13. Randall Crane, “On Form versus Function: Will the New Urbanism Reduce Traf-
fic, or Increase It?” Journal of Planning Education and Research 15, no. 2 (1996): 120.
     14. Patricia L. Mokhtarian, Ilan Salomon, and Lothlorien S. Redmond, “Understand-
ing the Demand for Travel: It’s Not Purely ‘Derived,’” Innovation: The European Journal
of Social Science Research 14, no. 4 (2001): 355–80.
     15. Salomon and Mokhtarian, “Mobility-Inclined Market Segments.”
     16. Mokhtarian and Salomon, “How Derived Is the Demand for Travel?,” 699.
     17. Patricia L. Mokhtarian and Ilan Salomon, “Travel for the Fun of It,” Access 15
(1999): 27.
    18. “The term [access] is not a good substitute for ‘mobility’, however, for it refers only
to a limited number of circumstances in which access may be operative in place of physical
mobility. . . . It is not even a good substitute for physical mobility, for it describes some-
thing other than mobility. In many cases, . . . it describes immobility. It can even mean,
apparently without consultation with immobile persons, an assumption of the undesir-
ability of a right of mobility for them. . . . The adoption of access as a social goal in place
of mobility may at first blush appear to be a broader and more useful approach, but the
most cursory examination shows that this is deceptive.” Houseman, Right of Mobility, 20.
“Most authors inside and outside transportation sciences see travel as an activity with a
secondary utility, as opposed to those activities having primary utility. . . . To my thinking
this is only partly true. Man is mobile. He cannot easily stay indoors all day long. He wants
to ‘exercise his legs’, ‘get a breath of fresh air’ and feels satisfaction in the mere act of mov-
ing, in taking his body and mind from one place to another. We are, after all, descendants
from the ‘naked ape’ who roamed the plains.” Geurt Hupkes,“The Law of Constant Travel
Time and Trip-Rates,” Futures, 14, no. 1 (1982): 38–46.
     19. Mokhtarian and Salomon, “How Derived Is the Demand for Travel?,” 697.
     20. Mokhtarian and Salomon, “How Derived Is the Demand for Travel?,” 695–719.
     21. Metropolitan Transportation Commission and Association of Bay Area Govern-
ments, Bay Area Census, http://www.bayareacensus.ca.gov/transportation/Commute
time19802000.htm.
     22. Levine, Zoned Out.
     23. Michael Heilig et al., “Large-Scale Application of a Combined Destination and
Mode Choice Model Estimated with Mixed Stated and Revealed Preference Data.” Trans-
portation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, no. 2669 (2017):
                                                       NOTES TO PAGES 25–30           181


31–40; Marcel Paulssen et al., “Values, Attitudes and Travel Behavior: A Hierarchical
Latent Variable Mixed Logit Model of Travel Mode Choice,” Transportation 41, no. 4
(2014): 873–88; David A. Hensher, “Measurement of the Valuation of Travel Time Sav-
ings,” Journal of Transport Economics and Policy 35, no. 1 (2001): 71–98; Ron Dalump-
ines and Darren M. Scott, “Determinants of Route Choice Behavior: A Comparison of
Shop versus Work Trips Using the Potential Path Area-Gateway (PPAG) Algorithm and
Path-Size Logit,” Journal of Transport Geography 59 (2017): 59–68; Brian H. Y. Lee et al.,
“Reexamining the Influence of Work and Nonwork Accessibility on Residential Loca-
tion Choices with a Microanalytic Framework,” Environment and Planning A 42, no. 4
(2010): 913–30; Barry Zondag and Marits Pieters, “Influence of Accessibility on Resi-
dential Location Choice,” Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation
Research Board, no. 1902 (2005): 63–70; Patrick M. Schirmer, Michael A. B. van Egg-
ermond, and Kay W. Axhausen, “The Role of Location in Residential Location Choice
Models: A Review of Literature,” Journal of Transport and Land Use 7, no. 2 (2014): 3–21;
Issam Srour, Kara M. Kockelman, and Travis P. Dunn, “Accessibility Indices: Connec-
tion to Residential Land Prices and Location Choices,” Transportation Research Record:
Journal of the Transportation Research Board, no. 1805 (2002): 25–34; Joshua Auld and
Abolfazl Mohammadian, “Planning-Constrained Destination Choice in Activity-Based
Model: Agent-Based Dynamic Activity Planning and Travel Scheduling,” Transportation
Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, no. 2254 (2011): 170–79.
    24. Juliet Jain and Glen Lyons, “The Gift of Travel Time,” Journal of Transport Geog-
raphy 16, no. 2 (2008): 81–89.
    25. Louis A. Merlin, “A Portrait of Accessibility Change for Four US Metropoli-
tan Areas,” Journal of Transport and Land Use 10, no. 1 (2017): 309–36, http://dx.doi.
org/10.5198/jtlu.2015.808.
    26. David M. Levinson, Wes Marshall, and Kay Axhausen, Elements of Access: Trans-
port Planning for Engineers, Transport Engineering for Planners (Sydney: Network Design
Laboratory, 2017), 48.
    27. Mokhtarian and Salomon, “How Derived Is the Demand for Travel?”
    28. Mokhtarian and Salomon, “Mobility-Inclined Market Segments,” 138.
    29. Mokhtarian and Salomon, “How Derived Is the Demand for Travel?,” 716–17.
    30. Mokhtarian and Salomon, “Mobility-Inclined Market Segments,” 138.
    31. David Banister, “The Sustainable Mobility Paradigm,” Transport Policy 15, no. 2
(2008): 73–80.
    32. Banister, “Sustainable Mobility Paradigm,” 75.
    33. Mokhtarian, Salomon, and Redmond, “Understanding the Demand for Travel,”
355; Mokhtarian and Salomon, “How Derived Is the Demand for Travel?”
    34. Reid Ewing and Robert Cervero, “Travel and the Built Environment: A Meta-
Analysis,” Journal of the American Planning Association 76, no. 3 (2010): 265–94; Mark R.
Stevens, “‘Does Compact Development Make People Drive Less?’: The Answer Is Yes,”
Journal of the American Planning Association 83, no. 1 (2016): 19–25.
    35. Shima Hamidi et al., “Measuring Sprawl and Its Impacts: An Update,” Journal of
Planning Education and Research 35, no. 1 (2015): 35–50.
    36. Randal O’Toole, Gridlock: Why We’re Stuck in Traffic and What to Do About It
(Washington, DC: Cato Institute, 2010), 169.
    37. Mokhtarian and Salomon, “Mobility-Inclined Market Segments,” 139.
    38. John B. Lansing, Robert W. Marans, and Robert B. Zehner, Planned Residential
Environments (Ann Arbor, MI: Survey Research Center, Institute for Social Research,
1970); Robert Cervero, “Jobs-Housing Balancing and Regional Mobility,” Journal of
the American Planning Association 55, no. 2 (1989): 136–50; Marlon Boarnet and Ran-
dall Crane, Travel by Design: The Influence of Urban Form on Travel (New York: Oxford
182          NOTES TO PAGES 30–37


University Press, 2001); Transportation Research Board, Driving and the Built Environ-
ment; Reid Ewing et al., “Testing Newman and Kenworthy’s Theory of Density and
Automobile Dependence,” Journal of Planning Education and Research 38, no. 2 (2018):
167–82.
    39. Marcial H. Echenique et al., “Does Urban Form Really Matter?,” Journal of the
American Planning Association 78, no. 2 (2012): 121–37; Stevens, “Does Compact Devel-
opment Make People Drive Less?,” 7–18.
    40. Ewing et al., “Testing Newman and Kenworthy’s Theory.”
    41. Robert Cervero and Jin Murakami, “Effects of Built Environments on Vehicle
Miles Traveled: Evidence from 370 US Urbanized Areas,” Environment and Planning A
42, no. 2 (2010): 400–418; James McIntosh et al., “The Role of Urban Form and Transit
in City Car Dependence: Analysis of 26 Global Cities from 1960 to 2000,” Transportation
Research Part D 33 (2014): 95–110.
    42. CalTrans, Guide for the Preparation of Traffic Impact Studies (Sacramento: Depart-
ment of Transportation, State of California, December 2002), 19.
    43. Liam Dillon, “Want a Bike Lane in Your Neighborhood?: It’s Not So Simple in
California,” Los Angeles Times, April 7, 2016, http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-pol-sac-
enviro-bike-lanes-20160407-story.html.
    44. According to the CEQA law, the alternative metrics could include “vehicle miles
traveled, vehicle miles traveled per capita, automobile trip generation rates, or automobile
trips generated.”
    45. Governor’s Office of Planning and Research (CA), “Revised Proposal on Updates
to the CEQA Guidelines on Evaluating Transportation Impacts in CEQA” (Sacramento,
CA, 2016), https://www.opr.ca.gov/docs/Revised_VMT_CEQA_Guidelines_Proposal_
January_20_2016.pdf.
    46. Ewing and Cervero, “Travel and the Built Environment,” 265–94; Dimitris Mila-
kis, Robert Cervero, and Bert van Wee, “Stay Local or Go Regional?: Urban Form Effects
on Vehicle Use at Different Spatial Scales: A Theoretical Concept and Its Application to
the San Francisco Bay Area,” Journal of Transport and Land Use 8, no. 2 (2015): 59–86.
    47. Crane, “On Form versus Function,” 117–26.
    48. Bert van Wee, “Evaluating the Impact of Land Use on Travel Behavior: The Envi-
ronment versus Accessibility,” Journal of Transport Geography 19, no. 6 (2011): 1530.
    49. Metz argues similarly that transportation-infrastructure improvement is much
more likely to translate into accessibility improvement to more distant destinations
than into travel-time savings. David Metz, “The Myth of Travel Time Saving,” Transport
Reviews 28, no. 3 (2008): 321–36.
2. EVOLUTION OF THE ACCESSIBILITY CONCEPT
      1. Richard M. Hurd, Principles of City Land Values (New York: Record and Guide,
1903); Robert M. Haig, “The Assignment of Activities to Areas in Urban Regions,” in
Regional Survey of New York and Its Environs (New York: Regional Survey, 1927), 1:31–44
(originally published in Quarterly Journal of Economics 40 [1926]: 402–34); John Q. Stew-
art, “Demographic Gravitation: Evidence and Applications,” Sociometry 11, no. 1 (1948):
31–58.
      2. Stewart, “Demographic Gravitation,” 57.
      3. W. G. Hansen, “How Accessibility Shapes Land Use,” 73–76.
      4. Stewart, “Demographic Gravitation,” 73.
      5. Willard B. Hansen, “An Approach to the Analysis of Metropolitan Residen-
tial Extension,” Journal of Regional Science 3, no. 1 (1961): 37–55; Donald M. Hill,
“A Growth Allocation Model for the Boston Region,” Journal of the American Institute of
Planners 31, no. 2 (1965): 111–20; Nancy J. Leathers, “Residential Location and Mode of
                                                      NOTES TO PAGES 37–42           183


Transportation to Work: A Model of Choice,” Transportation Research 1, no. 2 (1967):
129–55; Knud R. Overgaard, Traffic Estimation in Urban Transportation Planning
(Copenhagen: Danish Academy of Technical Sciences, 1966); Ross D. MacKinnon and M.
John Hodgson, “Optimal Transportation Networks: A Case Study of Highway Systems,”
Environment and Planning 2, no. 3 (1970): 267–84; Alan G. Wilson, “A Family of Spatial
Interaction Models, and Associated Developments,” Environment and Planning A 3, no. 1
(1971): 1–32; M. Cordey Hayes and Alan G. Wilson, “Spatial Interaction,” Socio-Economic
Planning Sciences 5, no. 1 (1971): 73–95; David R. Ingram, “The Concept of Accessibility:
A Search for an Operational Form,” Regional Studies 5, no. 2 (1971): 101–7.
     6. For example, Mei-Po Kwan, “Space-Time and Integral Measures of Individual
Accessibility: A Comparative Analysis Using a Point-Based Framework,” Geographical
Analysis 30, no. 3 (1998): 191–216; Harvey J. Miller, “Measuring Space-Time Accessibility
Benefits within Transportation Networks: Basic Theory and Computational Procedures,”
Geographical Analysis 31, no. 1 (1999): 1–26; Inge Thorsen and Jens P. Gitlesen, “A Simu-
lation Approach to Studying the Sensitivity of Commuting-Flow Predictions with Respect
to Specific Changes in Spatial Structure,” Environment and Planning A 34, no. 2 (2002):
271–88.
     7. Haig, “Assignment of Activities to Urban Regions,” 38.
     8. Haig, “Assignment of Activities to Urban Regions,” 44.
     9. Christopher G. Turner, “A Model Framework for Transportation and Community
Plan Analysis,” Journal of the American Planning Association 38, no. 5 (1972): 325–31.
    10. Wachs and Kumagai, “Physical Accessibility as a Social Indicator,” 440–41.
    11. Jennifer M. Morris, Peter L. Dumble, and Marcus R. Wigan, “Accessibility Indica-
tors for Transport Planning,” Transportation Research Part A 13, no. 2 (1979): 91.
    12. Chandra Bhat et al., Accessibility Measures: Formulation Considerations and Cur-
rent Applications, Research Report 4938-2 (Austin: Center for Transportation Research,
Bureau of Engineering Research, University of Texas, 2000), 11; David Schrank and Tim
Lomax, The 2007 Urban Mobility Report (College Station: Texas Transportation Institute,
Texas A&M University, 2007); United States Department of Transportation, Highway
Statistics 2002 (Washington, DC: Bureau of Highway Statistics, 2002); Transportation
Research Board, Highway Capacity Manual (Washington, DC: National Academies Press,
1994); John D. Edwards Jr., Transportation Planning Handbook (Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall, 1992).
    13. Wachs and Kumagai, “Physical Accessibility as a Social Indicator,” 442.
    14. Jeffrey Tumlin, Sustainable Transportation Planning: Tools for Creating Vibrant,
Healthy, and Resilient Communities (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2012), 4.
    15. Kevin J. Krizek, “Operationalizing Neighborhood Accessibility for Land Use–
Travel Behavior Research and Regional Modeling,” Journal of Planning Education and
Research 22, no. 3 (2003): 270–87; Louis Merlin, “Measuring Community Completeness:
Jobs Housing Balance, Accessibility, and Convenient Local Access to Nonwork Desti-
nations,” Environment and Planning B 41, no. 4 (2014): 736–56, http://doi.org/10.1068/
b120010p.
    16. Robert Cervero, Paradigm Shift: From Automobility to Accessibility Planning,
Working Paper 677 (Berkeley: Institute of Urban and Regional Development, University
of California, 1996), 2.
    17. Susan L. Handy, Accessibility- vs. Mobility-Enhancing Strategies for Addressing
Automobile Dependence in the U.S., UCD-ITS-RR-02-15 (Davis: Institute of Transporta-
tion Studies, University of California, 2002).
    18. Cervero, Paradigm Shift, 3.
    19. Cervero, Paradigm Shift, 18.
    20. Tumlin, Sustainable Transportation Planning, 4.
184          NOTES TO PAGES 42–53


    21. See the discussion of this problem in Handy, Accessibility- vs. Mobility-Enhancing
Strategies, 3.
    22. Southeast Michigan Council of Governments, 2030 Regional Transportation Plan for
Southeast Michigan (Detroit: Southeast Michigan Council of Governments, 2004), http://
s3.amazonaws.com/zanran_storage/library.semcog.org/ContentPages/2455560602.pdf.
    23. CalTrans, Performance Measure for Rural Transportation Systems: Guidebook
(2006), sec. 3-1, http://www.dot.ca.gov/perf/library/pdf/RSPMGuidebook.pdf.
    24. CalTrans, Performance Measure, sec. 4-1.
    25. Boisjoly and El-Geneidy, “How to Get There?”
    26. United States Code of Federal Regulations, Title 23, Highways, chap. 1, sec. 134(h)
(1)(D) (2006).
    27. National Research Council, Key Transportation Indicators: Summary of a Work-
shop, ed. Janet Norwood and Jamie Casey, Committee on National Statistics, Division
of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education (Washington, DC: National Academy
Press, 2002), https://www.nap.edu/read/10404/chapter/4#20.
    28. Randall Crane, “Counterpoint: Accessibility and Sprawl,” Journal of Transport and
Land Use 1, no. 1 (2008): 17.

3. ACCESSIBILITY IN EVERYDAY PLANNING
     1. For reviews, see Geurs and van Wee, “Accessibility Evaluation”; and Handy and
Niemeier, “Measuring Accessibility,” 1175–94.
     2. Qing Shen, “Location Characteristics of Inner-City Neighborhoods and Employ-
ment Accessibility of Low-Wage Workers,” Environment and Planning B 25, no. 3 (1998):
345–65.
     3. Joe Grengs, “Nonwork Accessibility as a Social Equity Indicator,” International
Journal of Sustainable Transportation 9, no. 1 (2015): 1–14.
     4. A common form used in standard transportation planning models is the nega-
tive exponential function. Transportation Research Board, Travel Estimation Techniques
for Urban Planning, NCHRP Report 365 (Washington, DC: National Academies Press,
1998).
     5. The result will differ by the mode of travel—a car provides a far wider range of
coverage than a bus for a given travel time.
     6. Walter Isard, Methods of Regional Analysis: An Introduction to Regional Science
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1960); Wilson, “Family of Spatial Interaction Models,”
1–32.
     7. Moshe E. Ben-Akiva and Steven E. Lerman, Discrete Choice Analysis: Theory and
Application to Predict Travel Demand, vol. 9 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1985).
     8. Joe Grengs, “Equity and the Social Distribution of Job Accessibility in Detroit,”
Environment and Planning B 39, no. 5 (2012): 785–800; Joe Grengs, “Comparing Peo-
ple and Places with Transportation Accessibility in Metropolitan Detroit,” in Mapping
Detroit: Land, Community, and Shaping a City, ed. June M. Thomas and Henco Bekkering
(Detroit, MI: Wayne State University Press, 2015): 101–14; Grengs et al., “Intermetro-
politan Comparison of Transportation Accessibility: Sorting Out Mobility and Proximity
in San Francisco and Washington, D.C.,” Journal of Planning Education and Research 29,
no. 4 (2010): 427–43.
     9. Grengs et al., “Intermetropolitan Comparison”; Levine et al., “Does Accessibility
Require Density or Speed?: A Comparison of Fast versus Close in Getting Where You
Want to Go in U.S. Metropolitan Regions,” Journal of the American Planning Association
78, no. 2 (2012): 157–72.
    10. Keith Bartholomew, Reid Ewing, and Gail Meakins, “Integrated Transportation
Scenario Planning,” Environment and Planning FHWA-HEP-10-034 (July 2010): 1–229.
                                                       NOTES TO PAGES 54–73           185


    11. Boisjoly and El-Geneidy “How to Get There?”; Proffitt et al., “Accessibility Plan-
ning in American Metropolitan Areas: Are We There Yet?,” Urban Studies 15 (2017):
1–26.
    12. Chicago Metropolitan Agency for Planning, Preferred Regional Scenario (Chicago:
Chicago Metropolitan Agency for Planning, 2008); Metropolitan Planning Commission
and Association of Bay Area Governments, Equity Analysis Report: Plan BayArea 2040
Final Supplemental Report (San Francisco: Metropolitan Transportation Commission
and Association of Bay Area Governments, 2017), http://2040.planbayarea.org/sites/
default/files/2017-07/Equity_Report_PBA%202040%20_7-2017.pdf.
    13. ARC, LCI Transportation Program (Atlanta, GA: Atlanta Regional Commission,
2010), http://www.atlantaregional.com/land-use/livable-centers-initiative/lci-transpor
tation-program; Envision Utah, Wasatch Choices 2040: A Four County Land-Use and
Transportation Vision (Salt Lake City, UT: Envision Utah, 2006).
    14. Kay W. Axhausen, “Accessibility Long Term Perspectives,” Journal of Transport
and Land Use 1, no. 2 (2008): 5–22; Andrew Owen, Brendan Murphy, and David M.
Levinson, Access Across America: Auto 2015, Report CTS 16-07 (Minneapolis: Accessibil-
ity Observatory, Center for Transportation Studies, Department of Civil, Environmental,
and Geo-Engineering, University of Minnesota, 2016), http://access.umn.edu/research/
america/auto/2015/.
    15. The method described in this chapter for land-development projects is imple-
mented for the United States on the freely accessible website: http://aim.fau.edu.
    16. Grengs et al., “Intermetropolitan Comparison of Transportation Accessibility,”
427–43.
    17. For details on the described procedure, see Jonathan Levine, Louis Merlin, and Joe
Grengs, “Project-Level Accessibility Analysis for Land-Use Planning,” Transport Policy 53
(2017): 107–19.
    18. Arthur C. Nelson, Planner’s Estimating Guide (Washington DC: American Plan-
ning Association Planners Press, 2004).
    19. Marlon G. Boarnet and Andrew F. Haughwout, “Do Highways Matter?: Evidence
and Policy Implications of Highways’ Influence on Metropolitan Development” (Berke-
ley: University of California Transportation Center, 2000).
    20. San Antonio–Bexar County Metropolitan Planning Organization, Mobility 2040
(San Antonio, TX, 2015).
    21. Louis A. Merlin, Jonathan Levine, and Joe Grengs, “Accessibility Analysis for
Transportation Projects and Plans,” Transport Policy 69 (2018): 35–48.
    22. Enrica Papa et al., “Accessibility Instruments for Planning Practice: A Review of
European Experiences,” Journal of Transport and Land Use 3, no. 3 (2015): 1–20.

4. ACCESSIBILITY AND URBAN FORM
     1. Reid Ewing, “Characteristics, Causes, and Effects of Sprawl: A Literature Review,”
Urban Ecology 21, no. 2 (1994): 519–35; Cervero, Paradigm Shift, 7.
     2. Sam Staley and Adrian T. Moore, Mobility First: A New Vision for Transportation in
a Globally Competitive Twenty-First Century (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2009).
     3. Owen, Murphy, and Levinson, Access Across America: Auto 2015.
     4. See Joe Grengs, “Measuring Change in Small-Scale Transit Accessibility with
Geographic Information Systems: The Cases of Buffalo and Rochester,” Transportation
Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, no. 1887 (2004): 10–17; and
Owen, Murphy, and Levinson, Access Across America: Auto 2015.
     5. See David Levinson, Bernadette Marion, and Michael Iacono, Access to Destina-
tions, Phase 3: Measuring Accessibility by Automobile, Mn/DOT 2010-09 (Minneapolis:
Department of Civil Engineering, University of Minnesota, 2010); Itzhak Benenson et al.,
186          NOTES TO PAGES 73–87


“Public Transport versus Private Car: GIS-Based Estimation of Accessibility Applied to
the Tel Aviv Metropolitan Area,” Annals of Regional Science 47, no. 3 (2011): 499–515;
Darren Scott and Mark Horner, “Examining the Role of Urban Form in Shaping Peo-
ple’s Accessibility to Opportunities: An Exploratory Spatial Data Analysis,” Journal of
Transport and Land Use 1, no. 2 (2008): 89–119; Cynthia Chen, The Temporal and Social
Dimension of Accessibility for New York City Residents, RF 49777-13-18 (New York: Uni-
versity Transportation Research Center, City College of New York, 2008); and Jianquan Q.
Cheng, Luca Bertolini, and Frank le Clercq, “Measuring Sustainable Accessibility,”
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, no. 2017
(2007): 16–25.
     6. See Grengs et al., “Intermetropolitan Comparison,” 427–43; Levine et al., “Does
Accessibility Require Density or Speed?,” 157–72; and Owen, Murphy, and Levinson,
Access Across America: Auto 2015.
     7. The complete study is available in Levine et al., “Does Accessibility Require Density
or Speed?,” 157–72.
     8. Levine et al., “Does Accessibility Require Density or Speed?,” 157–72.
     9. Grengs et al., “Intermetropolitan Comparison,” 427–43.
    10. As explained more fully in Grengs et al., “Intermetropolitan Comparison,” the
transformation is accomplished by calculating a z-score for each value in a zone-to-zone
travel speed matrix from metro A. This z-score matrix is then applied to the mean and
standard deviation of speeds from metro B to transform the speed distribution of metro
A into that of metro B.
    11. Staley and Moore, Mobility First.
    12. Claritas, Inc., Claritas Business-Facts Methodology (Ithaca, NY: Claritas, 2002).
    13. George Galster et al., “Wrestling Sprawl to the Ground: Defining and Measur-
ing an Elusive Concept,” Housing Policy Debate 12, no. 4 (2001): 681–717; Bumsoo Lee,
“‘Edge’ or ‘Edgeless’ Cities?: Urban Spatial Structure in US Metropolitan Areas, 1980 to
2000,” Journal of Regional Science 47, no. 3 (2007): 479–515.
    14. Trevor Thomas et al., “Not So Fast?: Examining Neighborhood-Level Effects of
Traffic Congestion on Job Access, Transportation Research Part A 113 (2018): 529–41.
    15. Reid Ewing, Rolf Pendall, and Don Chen, Sprawl Scores for 83 Metropolitan Regions
(Washington, DC: Smart Growth America, 2002).
    16. David Schrank and Tim Lomax, 2009 Urban Mobility Report (College Station:
Texas Transportation Institute, Texas A&M University, 2009).
    17. Andrew Owen, Brendan Murphy, and David Levinson, Access Across America:
Transit 2015, Report CTS 16-09 (Minneapolis: Accessibility Observatory, Center for
Transportation Studies, Department of Civil, Environmental, and Geo-Engineering,
University of Minnesota, 2016), http://www.cts.umn.edu/Publications/ResearchReports/
reportdetail.html?id=2554.
5. THE SPECIAL CASE OF PUBLIC-TRANSPORT ACCESSIBILITY
    1. Jarrett Walker, Human Transit: How Clearer Thinking about Public Transit Can
Enrich Our Communities and Our Lives (Washington, DC: Island Press, 2012), 20.
    2. Transportation Research Board, Expanding Metropolitan Highways.
    3. Jonathan Levine et al., Metropolitan Accessibility and Transportation Sustainability:
Comparative Indicators for Policy Reform (Final Report from EPA Agreement Number:
RD-833334901-0 and FHWA Cooperative Agreement Number: DTFH61-07-H-00037,
January 2011), http://hdl.handle.net/2027.42/147459.
    4. Eric Jaffe, “Explaining Transit’s Secret Language,” CityLab (March 8, 2012), https://
www.citylab.com/transportation/2012/03/teaching-language-transit/1438/.
                                                        NOTES TO PAGES 88–90            187


     5. Wait time is an important component of the total travel time in public transport,
and it is related to frequency (or headways). Some studies show that wait time is on aver-
age about one-half of the expected headway when transit service is reliable, but others
show that the average wait time tends to increase as a share of the expected headway,
especially for headways longer than thirty minutes. Daniel B. Hess, Jeffrey Brown, and
Donald Shoup, “Waiting for the Bus,” Journal of Public Transportation 7, no. 4 (2004):
67–84.
     6. Benenson et al., “Public Transport versus Private Car”; Aaron Golub, Glenn Rob-
inson, and Brendan Nee, “Making Accessibility Analyses Accessible: A Tool to Facilitate
the Public Review of the Effects of Regional Transportation Plans on Accessibility,” Jour-
nal of Transport and Land Use 6, no. 3 (2013): 17–28; Joe Grengs, “Job Accessibility and
the Modal Mismatch in Detroit,” Journal of Transport Geography 18, no. 1 (2010): 42–54;
Mark W. Horner, “Exploring Metropolitan Accessibility and Urban Structure,” Urban
Geography 25, no. 3 (2004): 264–84; Mizuki Kawabata, “Spatiotemporal Dimensions of
Modal Accessibility Disparity in Boston and San Francisco,” Environment and Planning A
41, no. 1 (2009): 183–98; Daniel B. Hess, “Access to Employment for Adults in Poverty in the
Buffalo-Niagara Region,” Urban Studies 42, no. 7 (2005): 1177–200; Thomas W. Sanchez,
Qing Shen, and Zhong-Ren Peng, “Transit Mobility, Jobs Access and Low-Income Labour
Participation in US Metropolitan Areas,” Urban Studies 41, no. 7 (2004): 1313–31.
     7. Grengs, “Measuring Change,” 10–17; Steven E. Polzin, Ram M. Pendyala, and
Sachin Navari, “Development of Time-of-Day–Based Transit Accessibility Analysis Tool,”
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, no. 1799
(2002): 35–41.
     8. One study devised a weighted average of sixteen accessibility indices calculated at
each hour throughout a day between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Yingling Fan,
Andrew E. Guthrie, and David M. Levinson, “Impact of Light Rail Implementation on
Labor Market Accessibility: A Transportation Equity Perspective,” Journal of Transport
and Land Use 5, no. 3 (2012): 28–39. Others include Steven Farber, Melinda Z. Morang,
and Michael J. Widener, “Temporal Variability in Transit-Based Accessibility to Super-
markets,” Applied Geography 53 (2014): 149–59; Andrew Owen and David M. Levinson,
“Modeling the Commute Mode Share of Transit Using Continuous Accessibility to Jobs,”
Transportation Research Part A 74 (2015): 110–22; and Adie Tomer et al., Missed Oppor-
tunity: Transit and Jobs in Metropolitan America (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution,
2011).
     9. Inshu Minocha et al., “Analysis of Transit Quality of Service and Employment
Accessibility for the Greater Chicago, Illinois, Region,” Transportation Research Record:
Journal of the Transportation Research Board, no. 2042 (2008): 20–29.
    10. Tomer et al., Missed Opportunity.
    11. Examples of accessibility calculations based on GTFS include Andrew Owen and
David M. Levinson, Access Across America: Transit 2014 Data (Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Digital Conservancy, 2014), http://dx.doi.org/10.13020/D6MW2Q); and
Tomer et al., Missed Opportunity.
    12. Owen and Levinson, in “Modeling the Commute Mode Share,” provide an exam-
ple of allowing for an unlimited number of transfers, an approach that is possible only
with fairly sophisticated technical and computer capacity. Aside from the technical chal-
lenges of accounting for transfers, because public-transport services in many regions are
provided by multiple agencies that may not coordinate services, it may not be realistic to
assume seamless connections across systems.
    13. Transit Cooperative Research Program, Transit Capacity and Quality of Service
Manual, 3rd ed. (Washington, DC: Transportation Research Board, 2013).
188           NOTES TO PAGES 90–92


    14. As defined in chapter 2, “accessibility” always refers to the ability to reach destina-
tions; “access,” by contrast, is the ability to reach the transportation system itself (in some
contexts the ability to reach the system itself is also called “availability”). “Accessibility” is
a commonly used but misleading term in reference to a particular transit stop or station,
as a “measure of the ability of all people within a defined area to get to a specific transit
station” (Transit Cooperative Research Program, Transit Capacity and Quality of Service
Manual, 2nd ed. (Washington, DC: Transportation Research Board, 2003).
    15. Arlington County, Additional Performance Measures (Arlington County, Virginia,
2015), 29, https://transportation.arlingtonva.us/wp-content/uploads/sites/19/2015/06/
FY14_Transportation_Performance_Measures_Appendix.pdf.
    16. Arlington County, Additional Performance Measures, 29.
    17. For examples of studies using various dimensions to evaluate public-transport
outcomes, see Ming Zhang, “Bus versus Rail: Meta-Analysis of Cost Characteristics, Car-
rying Capacities, and Land Use Impacts,” Transportation Research Record: Journal of the
Transportation Research Board, no. 2110 (2009): 87–95; Daniel B. Hess, Brian Taylor,
and Allison Yoh, “Light Rail Lite or Cost-Effective Improvements to Bus Service?: Evalu-
ating Costs of Implementing Bus Rapid Transit,” Transportation Research Record: Jour-
nal of the Transportation Research Board, no. 1927 (2005): 22–30; Arthur C. Nelson and
Joanna Ganning, National Study of BRT Development Outcomes, National Institute for
Transportation and Communities Final Report NITC-RR-650 (Portland, OR: National
Institute for Transportation and Communities, 2015), http://ppms.trec.pdx.edu/media/
project_files/NITC-RR-650_ELXlH8p.pdf; Aiga Stokenberga, “Does Bus Rapid Transit
Influence Urban Land Development and Property Values: A Review of the Literature,”
Transport Reviews 34, no. 3 (2014): 276–96; Sara I. Mohammad et al., “A Meta-Analysis
of the Impact of Rail Projects on Land and Property Values,” Transportation Research A
50 (2013): 158–70; Graham Currie, “Bus Transit Oriented Development—Strengths and
Challenges Relative to Rail,” Journal of Public Transportation 9, no. 4 (2006): 1–21; Milena
Scherer, “Is Light Rail More Attractive to Users Than Bus Transit?: Arguments Based on
Cognition and Rational Choice,” Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transpor-
tation Research Board, no. 2144 (2010): 11–19; Christopher Higgins, Mark Ferguson, and
Pavlos Kanaroglou, “Light Rail and Land Use Change: Rail Transit’s Role in Reshaping
and Revitalizing Cities,” Journal of Public Transportation 17, no. 2 (2014): 93–112; David
Banister and Mark Thurstain-Goodwin, “Quantification of the Non-Transport Ben-
efits Resulting from Rail Investment,” Journal of Transport Geography 19, no. 2 (2011):
212–23; and Sutapa Bhattacharjee and Andrew R. Goetz, “Impact of Light Rail on Traffic
Congestion in Denver,” Journal of Transport Geography 22 (2012): 262–70. Rail trans-
port has been evaluated for the consumer surplus it offers to passengers as a function of
total passenger kilometers and fares as compared to the public investment required for
its deployment. Erick Guerra, “Valuing Rail Transit: Comparing Capital and Operating
Costs with Consumer Benefits,” Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transpor-
tation Research Board, no. 2219 (2011): 50–58.
    18. Other commonly measured impacts of public transport—and dimensions on
which bus and rail have been compared—are related but not equivalent to public trans-
port’s accessibility impacts. For example, public transport’s impact on property values
is surely a function of the accessibility benefit that public transport brings, yet prop-
erty values themselves are not a full measure of the benefit that comes with accessibil-
ity improvements, since prices are affected by extraneous factors such as zoning-related
supply constraints. Public-transport usage and the consumer-surplus metrics that are
based on it are particularly important outcomes in that they shed direct light on public
transport’s performance, and any evaluation of public transport must include usage or
route productivity. Though ridership volume is central to establishing the usefulness of
public-transport services, it is insufficient as a metric of their quality.
                                                         NOTES TO PAGES 92–93             189


    19. Fan, Guthrie, and Levinson, “Impact of Light Rail Implementation,” 28–39.
    20. Alireza Ermagun and David Levinson, “Accessibility and Transit Performance,”
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Nexus Working Papers 000129 (2015), https://
conservancy.umn.edu/bitstream/handle/11299/179832/AccessibilityTransitPerformance.
pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y.
    21. We gratefully acknowledge the innovative dataset compiled at the University of
Minnesota. Ermagun and Levinson, “Accessibility and Transit Performance” (2015).
    22. Levine et al., “Does Accessibility Require Density or Speed?,” 157–72.
    23. Robert Cervero, The Transit Metropolis: A Global Inquiry (Washington, DC: Island
Press, 1998).
    24. National Transit Database, NTD Annual Database, https://www.transit.dot.gov/
ntd/ntd-data. Fixed guideway is a category whose service, at 91 percent of VRM, is domi-
nantly but not exclusively in rail. Other service types in this NTD category include some
BRT, fixed catenary, ferry, or any mode that uses a separate right-of-way for the exclusive
use of public transport. Non-fixed guideway refers to public transport in mixed-traffic
rights-of-way, and includes the modes of bus, demand response, commuter bus, and the
remainder of BRT. A large majority (91 percent) of service in the non-fixed-guideway
category is provided by buses.
    25. National Transit Database, NTD Annual Database. Fixed-guideway service—
the “rail” category in this analysis includes 6.5 million VRM in BRT, or 1 percent of all
fixed-guideway service. Non-fixed-guideway service includes 0.6 million VRM in BRT,
accounting for 0.03 percent of non-fixed-guideway VRM. While high-standard BRT is
based on dedicated lanes, many self-identified BRT systems in the United States include
segments (or in some cases entire lines) of bus service in mixed traffic. Institute for Trans-
portation and Development Policy, The Bus Rapid Transit Standard (New York, 2016),
https://www.itdp.org/library/standards-and-guides/the-bus-rapid-transit-standard/
the-scorecard/.
    26. Accessibility Observatory, Center for Transportation Studies, University of Min-
nesota, Access Across America: Transit 2014 Data, 2014, http://access.umn.edu/data/
datasets/; National Transit Database; Minnesota Population Center, National Histori-
cal Geographic Information System, Version 2.0 (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota,
2011), http://www.nhgis.org; U.S. Census Bureau, LODES Data (Longitudinal-Employer
Household Dynamics Program, 2015), http://lehd.ces.census.gov/data/lodes/.
    27. This is a weighted accessibility score for each metropolitan area based on the aver-
age number of jobs that are reachable by transit within 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, and 60 minutes;
within the weighting scheme, jobs that take longer to reach by public transport count
for less than jobs that are reachable in less time (for a more detailed description of the
methods for the accessibility score, see Owen and Levinson, Access Across America: Transit
2014 Data. This creates a metric similar to gravity-based accessibility, with the weighting
of the various isochrones playing the same role as the impedance parameter. Levine et al.,
“Does Accessibility Require Density or Speed?,” 157–72; Grengs et al., “Intermetropolitan
Comparison,” 427–43.
    28. A metropolitan area will have a higher fit if it has higher-density residential
development in areas with superior public-transport accessibility. The Fit Index varies
from highs of around 0.35 for the Milwaukee, Minneapolis, and New York metropoli-
tan regions to lows of around 0.02 for the Dallas, Orlando, and Raleigh metropolitan
regions. A higher Gini Index indicates that the distribution of public-transport acces-
sibility is concentrated among a small percentage of the population, and therefore that
public-transport accessibility is spread less evenly. A public-transport system in which all
resources are concentrated on just one line serving a highly populated corridor would lead
to a highly uneven distribution of public-transport accessibility and a high Gini Index; a
system that spreads public-transport service more evenly across many lines reaching all
190          NOTES TO PAGES 94–101


corners of the metropolitan region would lead to a lower Gini Index. The Gini Index is
high for all regions of this study, indicating an uneven intrametropolitan distribution of
public-transport accessibility. The index ranges from lows around 0.60 for metropoli-
tan areas including San Jose, Salt Lake City, and Riverside to highs above 0.84 for the
metropolitan areas with the most uneven distribution of public-transport accessibility:
Pittsburgh, Nashville, and Atlanta.
    29. Several regression models (not shown here) were constructed to test the contribu-
tion of rail and bus modes to job accessibility. First, a model was estimated for all forty-
six metropolitan areas. New York exerted high leverage over the regression, which raised
the concern that this regression was unduly influenced by this extreme case. To ensure
that results were not an artifact of this leverage, models presented here were constructed
without New York.
    30. Jonathan Levine, “Is Bus versus Rail Investment a Zero-Sum Game?: The Misuse
of the Opportunity-Cost Concept,” Journal of the American Planning Association 79, no. 1
(2013): 5–15.
    31. Because of data limitations, the shift from average to 85th-percentile accessibility
necessitated moving from job accessibility weighted across all time bands to the thirty-
minute time band alone. To test the impact of this shift, models were estimated using the
mean thirty-minute time band and compared with the average weighted accessibility.
The similarity between these models suggests that differences between models A and B on
the one hand and C and D on the other are principally attributable to the shift from the
mean resident to the 85th-percentile resident, rather than the shift from average weighted
accessibility to thirty-minute accessibility.
    32. Charting high-Gini and low-Gini metropolitan areas of similar size and with simi-
lar levels of total public-transport service (VRM per capita) shows that the accessibility dif-
ference between two metros at the 85th percentile is considerably greater than at the mean
of the accessibility distribution. For example, Salt Lake City (Gini=0.61) has a broader
spread of public transport than Charlotte (Gini=0.84), and public-transport accessibility
is much higher in Salt Lake City as compared to Charlotte at the 85th percentile.
    33. Levine, “Is Bus versus Rail Investment a Zero-Sum Game?,” 5–15.
    34. United States General Accounting Office, Bus Rapid Transit Shows Promise (Wash-
ington DC: U.S. General Accounting Office, 2001). Not only are rail capital costs much
higher than buses, so too are busways. The GAO reports busway capital costs to be over
nineteen times the capital costs of buses on arterials.
    35. Zhang, “Bus Versus Rail,” 87–95.
    36. Calculations based on National Transit Database for 2013 data.
    37. Robert Cervero, “Bus Rapid Transit (BRT): An Efficient and Competitive Mode
of Public Transport,” Working Paper 2013-01 (Berkeley, CA: Institute of Urban and
Regional Development, 2013), http://iurd.berkeley.edu/wp/2013-01.pdf.
    38. National Cooperative Highway Research Program, Default Values for Highway
Capacity and Level of Service Analyses, NCHRP Report 599 (Washington DC: National
Cooperative Highway Research Program, 2008).
    39. Levine, “Is Bus Versus Rail Investment a Zero-Sum Game?,” 5–15.
    40. Levine, Zoned Out.
6. ACCESSIBILITY IN SOCIAL-EQUITY EVALUATION
     1. Devajyoti Deka, “Social and Environmental Justice Issues in Urban Transpor-
tation,” in The Geography of Urban Transportation, ed. Susan Hanson and Genevieve
Giuliano, 3rd ed. (New York: Guilford Press, 2004), 332–55; David J. Forkenbrock and
Lisa A. Schweitzer, “Environmental Justice in Transportation Planning,” Journal of the
American Planning Association 65, no. 1 (1999): 96–111; Alan Hay, “Equity and Welfare
                                                     NOTES TO PAGES 102–104            191


in the Geography of Public Transport Provision,” Journal of Transport Geography 1,
no. 2 (1993): 95–101; David C. Hodge, “My Fair Share: Equity Issues in Urban Transpor-
tation,” in The Geography of Urban Transportation, ed. Susan Hanson, 2nd ed. (New York:
Guilford Press, 1995), 359–75; Lisa Schweitzer and Abel Valenzuela Jr., “Environmental
Injustice and Transportation: The Claims and the Evidence,” Journal of Planning Litera-
ture 18, no. 4 (2004): 383–98; Brian D.Taylor and Alexandra Tassiello Norton, “Paying
for Transportation: What’s a Fair Price?,” Journal of Planning Literature 24, no. 1 (2009):
22–36.
     2. Transportation Research Board, Expanding Metropolitan Highways.
     3. Robert D Bullard, Angel O. Torres, and Glenn S. Johnson, eds., Sprawl City: Race,
Politics, and Planning in Atlanta (Washington, DC: Island Press, 2000); Rolf Pendall,
“Do Land Use Controls Cause Sprawl?,” Environment and Planning B 26 (1999): 555–71;
Gregory D. Squires and Charis E. Kubrin, “Privileged Places: Race, Uneven Development and
the Geography of Opportunity in Urban America,” Urban Studies 42, no. 1 (2005): 47–68.
     4. Jago Dodson et al., “Travel Behavior Patterns of Different Socially Disadvantaged
Groups: Analysis of Household Travel Survey Data for a Dispersed Metropolitan Area,”
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, no. 2163
(2010): 24–31; David J. Forkenbrock and Glen E. Weisbrod, Guidebook for Estimating
the Social and Economic Effects of Transportation Projects, NCHRP Report 456 (Wash-
ington, DC: National Academy Press, 2001); Genevieve Giuliano, “Travel, Location and
Race/Ethnicity,” Transportation Research Part A 37, no. 4 (2003): 351–72; Ibipo Johnston-
Anumonwo, “Racial Differences in the Commuting Behavior of Women in Buffalo,
1980–1990,” Urban Geography 16, no. 1 (1995): 23–45.
     5. John Pucher and John L. Renne, “Socioeconomics of Urban Travel: Evidence from
the 2001 NHTS,” Transportation Quarterly 57, no. 3 (2003): 49–77; Brian D. Taylor and
Paul M. Ong, “Spatial Mismatch or Automobile Mismatch?: An Examination of Race,
Residence, and Commuting in U.S. Metropolitan Areas,” Urban Studies 32, no. 9 (1995):
1537–57.
     6. Elizabeth Deakin, “Equity and Environmental Justice in Sustainable Transporta-
tion: Toward a Research Agenda,” in Institutions and Sustainable Transport: Regulatory
Reform in Advanced Economies, ed. Piet Rietveld and Roger R. Stough (Cheltenham, UK:
Edward Elgar, 2007), 51–69; Alex Karner and Deb A. Niemeier, “Civil Rights Guidance
and Equity Analysis Methods for Regional Transportation Plans: A Critical Review of
Literature and Practice,” Journal of Transport Geography 33 (2013): 126–34; Scott G. Mills
and Sieglinde K. Neuhauser, “Quantitative Methods for Environmental Justice Assess-
ment of Transportation,” Risk Analysis 20, no. 3 (2000): 377–84; Schweitzer and Valen-
zuela, “Environmental Injustice and Transportation,” 383–98.
     7. Social Exclusion Unit, Making the Connections: Final Report on Transport and
Social Exclusion (London: Office of the Deputy Prime Minister, 2003); John Farrington
and Conor Farrington, “Rural Accessibility, Social Inclusion and Social Justice: Towards
Conceptualisation,” Journal of Transport Geography 13, no. 1 (2005): 1–12; John Preston
and Fiona Rajé, “Accessibility, Mobility and Transport-Related Social Exclusion,” Jour-
nal of Transport Geography 15, no. 3 (2007): 151–60; Bert van Wee and Karst T. Geurs,
“Discussing Equity and Social Exclusion in Accessibility Evaluations,” European Journal
of Transport and Infrastructure Research 11, no. 4 (2011): 350–67.
     8. Social Exclusion Unit, Making the Connections.
     9. Karen Lucas, “Transport and Social Exclusion: Where Are We Now?,” Transport
Policy 20 (2012): 105–13.
    10. Lucas, “Transport and Social Exclusion,” 112.
    11. Shannon Cairns, Jessica Greig, and Martin Wachs, Environmental Justice and
Transportation: A Citizen’s Handbook, UCTC No. 620 (Berkeley: University of California
192          NOTES TO PAGES 104–106


Transportation Center, 2003); Thomas W. Sanchez and Marc Brenman, The Right to
Transportation: Moving to Equity (Chicago: American Planning Association, 2007).
    12. Karner and Niemeier, “Civil Rights Guidance,” 126–34; Thomas W. Sanchez, Rich
Stolz, and Jacinta S. Ma, Moving to Equity: Addressing Inequitable Effects of Transportation
Policies on Minorities (Cambridge, MA: Civil Rights Project at Harvard University, 2003).
    13. Cambridge Systematics, Technical Methods to Support Analysis of Environmen-
tal Justice Issues (Cambridge, MA: National Cooperative Highway Research Program,
2002), 1.
    14. Halden, “Use and Abuse of Accessibility Measures”; Karen Lucas, “A Critical
Assessment of Accessibility Planning for Social Inclusion,” in Accessibility Analysis and
Transport Planning: Challenges for Europe and North America, ed. Karst T. Geurs, Kevin
J. Krizek, and Aura Reggiani (Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2012), 245–62; Lucas,
“Transport and Social Exclusion,” 105–13.
    15. Federal Transit Administration, FTA Circular 4702.1A: Title VI and Title VI–
Dependent Guidelines for Federal Transit Administration Recipients (Washington, DC:
U.S. Department of Transportation, 2007); Federal Transit Administration, FTA Circular
4702.1B: Title VI Requirements and Guidelines for Federal Transit Administration Recipi-
ents (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Transportation, 2012).
    16. Federal Transit Administration, FTA Circular 4702.1A, VI-1.
    17. Cambridge Systematics, Technical Methods to Support Analysis; Karner and Nie-
meier, “Civil Rights Guidance,” 126–34.
    18. Michael W. Steinberg, “Making Sense of Environmental Justice,” Forum for
Applied Research and Public Policy 15, no. 3 (2000): 82–89.
    19. Mid-America Regional Council, Environmental Justice Analysis (Kansas City, MO:
Mid-America Regional Council, 2013).
    20. Forkenbrock and Weisbrod, Guidebook for Estimating the Social and Economic
Effects.
    21. Cambridge Systematics, Technical Methods to Support Analysis; Kevin Manaugh,
Madhav G. Badami, and Ahmed M. El-Geneidy, “Integrating Social Equity into Urban
Transportation Planning: A Critical Evaluation of Equity Objectives and Measures in
Transportation Plans in North America,” Transport Policy 37 (2015): 167–76; Charles
Purvis, “Data and Analysis Methods for Metropolitan-Level Environmental Justice
Assessment,” Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research
Board, no. 1756 (2001): 15–21.
    22. Boston Region Metropolitan Planning Organization, “Transportation Equity,” in
Long-Range Transportation Plan of the Boston Region Metropolitan Planning Organiza-
tion (Boston, MA: Boston Region Metropolitan Planning Organization, 2015), 7-1–7-17;
Metropolitan Transportation Commission, Transportation 2035 Plan for the San Francisco
Bay Area: Equity Analysis Report (Oakland, CA: Metropolitan Transportation Commis-
sion, 2009); Mid-Ohio Regional Planning Commission, “Appendix D: Environmental
Justice Technical Analysis,” in 2012–2035 Metropolitan Transportation Plan (Columbus:
Mid-Ohio Regional Planning Commission, 2012).
    23. Mid-Ohio Regional Planning Commission, 2012–2035 Metropolitan Transporta-
tion Plan, 37.
    24. Jonathan Levine, “Urban Transportation and Social Equity: Transportation-
Planning Paradigms That Impede Policy Reform,” in Policy, Planning, and People: Pro-
moting Justice in Urban Development, ed. Naomi Carmon and Susan S. Fainstein (Phila-
delphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2013), 141–60.
    25. Wachs and Kumagai, “Physical Accessibility,” 437–56.
    26. Karel Martens, “Justice in Transport as Justice in Accessibility: Applying Walzer’s
‘Spheres of Justice’ to the Transport Sector,” Transportation 39, no. 6 (2012): 1035–53;
Martens, Transport Justice; Preston and Rajé, “Accessibility, Mobility,” 151–60.
                                                    NOTES TO PAGES 107–111            193


    27. John Black and Chatherine M. Conroy, “Accessibility Measures and the Social
Evaluation of Urban Structure,” Environment and Planning A 9 (1977): 1013–31; Wachs
and Kumagai, “Physical Accessibility,” 437–56.
    28. Todd Litman, “Evaluating Transportation Equity,” World Transport Policy and
Practice 8, no. 2 (2002): 50–65; Taylor and Tassiello Norton, “Paying for Transportation,”
22–36.
    29. Nicole Foth, Kevin Manaugh, and Ahmed M. El-Geneidy, “Towards Equitable
Transit: Examining Transit Accessibility and Social Need in Toronto, Canada, 1996–2006,”
Journal of Transport Geography 29 (2013): 1–10; Martens, “Justice in Transport,” 1035–53;
Karel Martens, Aaron Golub, and Glenn Robinson, “A Justice-Theoretic Approach to
the Distribution of Transportation Benefits: Implications for Transportation Planning
Practice in the United States,” Transportation Research Part A 46, no. 4 (2012): 684–95;
Alan T. Murray and Rex Davis, “Equity in Regional Service Provision,” Journal of Regional
Science 41, no. 4 (2001): 577–600.
    30. Cambridge Systematics, Technical Methods to Support Analysis.
    31. Deakin, “Equity and Environmental Justice”; Karner and Niemeier, “Civil Rights
Guidance,” 126–34.
    32. Martens, “Justice in Transport,” 1048.
    33. Benenson et al., “Public Transport versus Private Car”; Erin M. Ferguson et al.,
“Incorporating Equity into the Transit Frequency-Setting Problem,” Transportation
Research Part A 46 no. 1 (2012): 190–99; Kawabata, “Spatiotemporal Dimensions,” 183–98;
Rebecca C. W. Kwok and Anthony G. O. Yeh, “The Use of Modal Accessibility Gap
as an Indicator for Sustainable Transport Development,” Environment and Planning
A 36 (2004): 921–36. One of the earliest recommendations for minimizing this difference
was based on the view that sustainability planning requires prioritizing public transport
accessibility over private transport. Kwok and Yeh, “Use of Modal Accessibility Gap,”
925. Focusing on transit’s accessibility relative to the car has been promoted as a useful
approach to addressing the social and environmental costs of high levels of automobile
dependence and rectifying auto-oriented urban spatial structure. Kawabata, “Spatiotem-
poral Dimensions,” 183–98; Mizuki Kawabata and Qing Shen, “Job Accessibility as an
Indicator of Auto-Oriented Urban Structure: A Comparison of Boston and Los Angeles
with Tokyo,” Environment and Planning B 33, no. 1 (2006): 115–30; Mizuki Kawabata and
Qing Shen, “Commuting Inequality between Cars and Public Transit: The Case of the San
Francisco Bay Area, 1990–2000,” Urban Studies 44, no. 9 (2007): 1759–80.
    34. Ferguson et al., “Incorporating Equity,” 192.
    35. Martens, Golub, and Robinson, “Justice-Theoretic Approach,” 689.
    36. Grengs, “Job Accessibility,” 42–54; Kate Lowe and Joe Grengs, “Private Dona-
tions for Public Transit: The Equity Implications of Detroit’s Public-Private Street-
car,” Journal of Planning Education and Research (March 13, 2018), https://doi.
org/10.1177/0739456X18761237; Jen Nelles, “Regionalism Redux: Exploring the Impact
of Federal Grants on Mass Public Transit Governance and Political Capacity in Metro-
politan Detroit,” Urban Affairs Review 49, no. 2 (March 1, 2013): 220–53.
    37. Evelyn Blumenberg and Michael Manville, “Beyond the Spatial Mismatch: Welfare
Recipients and Transportation Policy,” Journal of Planning Literature 19, no. 2 (2004):
186; see also Grengs, “Job Accessibility,” 42–54.
    38. Shared-Use Mobility Center, Shared-Use Mobility Reference Guide (Chicago: Shared-
Use Mobility Center, 2015), http://sharedusemobilitycenter.org/wp-content/uploads/
2015/09/SharedUseMobility_ReferenceGuide_09.25.2015.pdf.
    39. Mark Garrett and Brian Taylor, “Reconsidering Social Equity in Public Transit,”
Berkeley Planning Journal 13 (1999): 6–27; Martin Wachs and Brian D. Taylor, “Can
Transportation Strategies Help Meet the Welfare Challenge?,” Journal of the American
Planning Association 64, no. 1 (1998): 15–19.
194          NOTES TO PAGES 111–119


    40. Deakin, “Equity and Environmental Justice”; Aaron Golub, Richard A. Marcan-
tonio, and Thomas W. Sanchez, “Race, Space, and Struggles for Mobility,” Urban Geog-
raphy 34, no. 5 (2013): 699–728; Joe Grengs, “Community-Based Planning as a Source
of Political Change: The Transit Equity Movement of Los Angeles’ Bus Riders Union,”
Journal of the American Planning Association 68, no. 2 (2002): 165–78; Karner and Nie-
meier, “Civil Rights Guidance,” 126–34; Eric Mann, “Confronting Transit Racism in
Los Angeles,” in Just Transportation: Dismantling Race and Class Barriers to Mobility, ed.
Robert D. Bullard and Glenn S. Johnson (Gabriola Island, BC: New Society, 1997), 68–83;
Sanchez and Brenman, Right to Transportation; Transit Cooperative Research Program,
Civil Rights Implications of the Allocation of Funds between Bus and Rail, Legal Research
Digest 27 (Washington, DC: Transportation Research Board, 2008).
    41. Edward L. Glaeser, Matthew E. Kahn, and Jordan Rappaport, “Why Do the Poor
Live in Cities: The Role of Public Transportation,” Journal of Urban Economics 63, no. 1
(2008): 1–24; Grengs, “Job Accessibility,” 42–54.
    42. The quartiles of transit accessibility are defined internally to each metropolitan
area. The top quartile of Kansas City, for example, would represent much lower acces-
sibility than the top quartile of New York City. This helps indicate the capacity or desire
of transit-dependent households to select the transit-accessible areas within their own
metropolitan region.
    43. This is consistent with the pioneering work by the Center for Neighborhood Tech-
nology and the Center for Transit-Oriented Development in creating what they refer to
as the “H + T Affordability Index,” which in part measures the savings that derive from
living in transit-rich neighborhoods.
    44. William J. Clinton, Executive Order No. 12898: Federal Actions to Address Envi-
ronmental Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income Populations, Federal Register
59:7629 (1994); Federal Transit Administration, FTA Circular 4702.1A.
    45. Pucher and Renne, “Socioeconomics of Urban Travel,” 49–77.
    46. Although the data and steps required are not outlined here, they can be found
elsewhere: Grengs, “Equity and the Social Distribution,” 785–800; Grengs, “Nonwork
Accessibility,” 1–14; Levine et al., Metropolitan Accessibility.
    47. Grengs, “Job Accessibility,” 42–54; Lingqian Hu, “Job Accessibility of the Poor in
Los Angeles,” Journal of the American Planning Association 81, no. 1 (2015): 30–45.
    48. Laurent Gobillon, Harris Selod, and Yves Zenou, “The Mechanisms of Spatial Mis-
match,” Urban Studies 44, no. 12 (2007): 2401–27; Elvin K. Wyly and Daniel J. Hammel,
“Gentrification, Segregation, and Discrimination in the American Urban System,” Envi-
ronment and Planning A 36, no. 7 (2004): 1215–41.
    49. Several cases are notable for unusual patterns (although the figures are not shown
for brevity). First, some metropolitan regions have an unusually high disparity between
low-income households and high-income households, including Baltimore, Cincinnati,
Los Angeles, Memphis, and Philadelphia. Second, several regions show a distinctly low
disparity between low- and high-income households, including Atlanta, Chicago, Min-
neapolis–St. Paul, and Seattle.
    50. Pucher and Renne, “Socioeconomics of Urban Travel,” 49–77.
    51. Harry Holzer, “The Spatial Mismatch Hypothesis: What Has the Evidence
Shown?,” Urban Studies 28, no. 1 (1991): 105–22; John F. Kain, “The Spatial Mismatch
Hypothesis: Three Decades Later,” Housing Policy Debate 3, no. 2 (1992): 371–460; Doug-
las S. Massey and Nancy A. Denton, American Apartheid: Segregation and the Making of the
Underclass (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1993); Valerie Preston and Sara
McLafferty, “Spatial Mismatch Research in the 1990s: Progress and Potential,” Papers in
Regional Science 78 (1999): 387–402.
                                                    NOTES TO PAGES 121–127           195


   52. Xavier de Souza Briggs, ed., The Geography of Opportunity: Race and Housing
Choice in Metropolitan America (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 2005); Peter
Dreier, John H. Mollenkopf, and Todd Swanstrom, Place Matters: Metropolitics for the
Twenty-First Century, 2nd ed. (Lawrence,: University Press of Kansas, 2004).
   53. Accessibility models that account for job competition would likely diminish
the benefits of central location to employment. Qing Shen, “Location Characteristics,”
345–65.
   54. William Alonso, “A Theory of the Urban Land Market,” in Readings in Urban Eco-
nomics, ed. Matthew Edel and Jerome Rothenberg (New York: Macmillan, 1972): 104–11.
7. NONWORK ACCESSIBILITY
     1. United States Department of Transportation, 2009 National Household Travel Sur-
vey (Washington, DC: Federal Highway Administration, 2011), 25.
     2. United States Department of Transportation, 2009 National Household Travel
Survey.
     3. United States Department of Labor, Economic News Release: Employee Tenure Sum-
mary (Washington DC: Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2010), http://www.bls.gov.proxy.lib.
umich.edu/news.release/tenure.nr0.htm; Jason Schachter, Geographical Mobility: March
1999 to March 2000, Current Population Reports P20–538 (Washington, DC: U.S. Census
Bureau, 2001).
     4. Michael J. Widener et al., “Using Urban Commuting Data to Calculate a Spatio-
temporal Accessibility Measure for Food Environment Studies,” Health & Place, no. 21
(2013): 1–9; Wei Luo and Fahui Yang, “Measures of Spatial Accessibility to Healthcare in
a GIS Environment: Synthesis and a Case Study in the Chicago Region,” Environment and
Planning B, no. 3 (2003): 865–84.
     5. Peter Gordon, Ajay Kumar, and Harry W. Richardson, “Beyond the Journey to
Work,” Transportation Research Part A 22, no. 6 (1988): 419.
     6. Kang-Rae Ma and David Banister, “Excess Commuting: A Critical Review,” Trans-
port Reviews 26, no. 6 (2006): 763–64.
     7. Muhammad A. Habib and Eric J. Miller, “Reference-Dependent Residential Loca-
tion Choice Model within a Relocation Context,” Transportation Research Record: Journal
of the Transportation Research Board, no. 2133 (2009): 92–99; Amaya Vega and Aisling
Reynolds-Feighan, “A Methodological Framework for the Study of Residential Location
and Travel-to-Work Mode Choice under Central and Suburban Employment Destina-
tion Patterns,” Transportation Research Part A 43, no. 4 (2009): 401–19; Joseph Prashker,
Yoram Shiftan, and Pazit Hershkovitch-Sarusi, “Residential Choice Location, Gender
and the Commute Trip to Work in Tel Aviv,” Journal of Transport Geography 16, no. 5
(2008): 332–41; Diana Mok, “Do Two-Earner Households Base Their Choice of Resi-
dential Location on Both Incomes?,” Urban Studies 44, no. 4 (2007): 723–50; Patricio E.
Pérez, Francisco J. Martínez, and Juan de Dios Ortúzar, “Microeconomic Formulation
and Estimation of a Residential Location Choice Model: Implications for the Value of
Time,” Journal of Regional Science 43, no. 4 (2003): 771–89; Srour, Kockelman, and Dunn,
“Accessibility Indices.”
     8. Lee et al., “Reexamining the Influence of Work and Nonwork Accessibility,”
913–30.
     9. Jason Chen, Cynthia Chen, and Harry Timmermans, “Accessibility Trade-Offs in
Household Residential Location Decisions,” Transportation Research Record: Journal of
the Transportation Research Board, no. 2077 (2008): 71–79.
    10. Lee et al., “Reexamining the Influence of Work and Nonwork Accessibility,”
913–30; Chen et al., “Accessibility Trade-Offs,” 71–79.
196          NOTES TO PAGES 127–141


    11. Dick Ettema and Harry Timmermans, “Space-Time Accessibility under Condi-
tions of Uncertain Travel Times: Theory and Numerical Simulations,” Geographical Anal-
ysis 39, no. 2 (2007): 217–40.
    12. Philippe Apparicio and Anne-Marie Séguin, “Measuring the Accessibility of Ser-
vices and Facilities for Residents of Public Housing in Montreal,” Urban Studies 43, no. 1
(2006): 187–211.
    13. Juan Carlos Martin and Aura Reggiani, “Recent Methodological Developments to
Measure Spatial Interaction: Synthetic Accessibility Indices Applied to High-Speed Train
Investments,” Transport Reviews 27, no. 5 (2007): 551–71.
    14. Torsten Hägerstrand, “What About People in Regional Science?,” Papers in
Regional Science 24, no. 1 (1970): 6–21; Mei-Po Kwan and Joe Weber, “Scale and Acces-
sibility: Implications for the Analysis of Land Use–Travel Interaction,” Applied Geography
28, no. 2 (2008): 110–23.
    15. United States Department of Transportation, 2001 National Household Travel Sur-
vey (Washington, DC: Federal Highway Administration and Bureau of Transportation
Statistics, 2003).
    16. The method used to calculate the coefficient of impedance is detailed in Levine
et al., “Does Accessibility Require Density or Speed?,” 157–72, 161. For work travel, the
best-fitting regression is: estimated β = 0.109*exp(–3.52*10–8.*Population). For nonwork
travel, the best-fitting regression is: estimated β = 0.24*exp(–3.52*10–8.*Population).
    17. See Jianxin Gong, “Clarifying the Standard Deviational Ellipse,” Geographical
Analysis 34, no. 2 (2002): 155–67. Median ellipse sizes across thirty-eight metropolitan
regions studied: work locations, 1,482 km2; nonwork locations, 1642 km2; population,
1845 km2.
    18. Levine, Zoned Out; Daniel G. Chatman, “Residential Choice, the Built Environ-
ment, and Nonwork Travel: Evidence Using New Data and Methods,” Environment and
Planning A 41, no. 5 (2009): 1072–89.
    19. Grengs, “Nonwork Accessibility,” 1–14.
CONCLUSION
      1. John Stuart Mill, On Liberty (1859; repr., New York: Penguin Press, 1985).
      2. Andrew Monschein and Brian D. Taylor, “Is Traffic Congestion Overrated?:
Examining the Highly Variable Effects of Congestion on Travel and Accessibility,” Journal
of Transport Geography 64 (2017): 65–76.
      3. Jeffrey Gutman and Adie Tomer, Developing a Common Narrative on Urban Acces-
sibility: Overview, Moving to Access (Washington, DC: Brookings, 2016), https://www.
brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/overview-digital.pdf.
      4. Chang-Hee Christine Bae, “Air Quality and Travel Behavior: Untying the Knot,”
Journal of the American Planning Association 59, no. 1 (1993): 65–74; Martin Wachs,
“Learning from Los Angeles: Transport, Urban Form, and Air Quality,” Transportation
20, no. 4 (1993): 329–54.
      5. J. Meyer et al., “Autonomous Vehicles: The Next Jump in Accessibilities?,” Research
in Transportation Economics 62 (2017): 80–90.
      6. For example, Adam Lovelady, “MPOs and the Integration of Transportation and
Land Use Planning,” Virginia Environmental Law Journal 27, no. 3 (2009): 275–320;
Marianne Hatzopoulou and Eric J. Miller, “Institutional Integration for Sustainable
Transportation Policy in Canada,” Transport Policy 15, no. 3 (2008): 149–62; Marco Te
Brömmelstroet and Luca Bertolini, “Integrating Land Use and Transport Knowledge in
Strategy-Making,” Transportation 37, no. 1 (2010): 85–104.
      7. Schrank et al., 2015 Urban Mobility Scorecard.
                                                      NOTES TO PAGES 141–148            197


     8. Transportation Research Board, Highway Capacity Manual: A Guide for Multi-
modal Mobility Analysis, 6th ed. (Washington, DC: Transportation Research Board,
2016); American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials and Knovel,
A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, 6th. ed. (Washington, DC: Ameri-
can Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, 2011); Institute of Trans-
portation Engineers, Traffic Engineering Handbook (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2016).
     9. Rolf Pendall, “Local Land Use Regulation and the Chain of Exclusion,” Journal of
the American Planning Association 66, no. 2 (2000): 125–42.
    10. Judith E. Innes, “Information in Communicative Planning,” Journal of the Ameri-
can Planning Association 68 (1998): 52–63.
    11. Institute of Transportation Engineers, Transportation Impact Analyses, 99.
    12. George Edward Moore, Principia Ethica, ed. Thomas Baldwin (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1993); Bent Flyvbjerg, Making Social Science Matter.
    13. “Transportation Concurrency,” chap. 12.24 of the City of Snoqualmie (Washing-
ton) Municipal Code, http://www.codepublishing.com/WA/Snoqualmie/.
    14. “Guidelines for Traffic Impact Analysis (Zoning Petitions),” Wake County, North
Carolina, accessed February 1, 2019, http://www.wakegov.com/planning/zoning/Docu
ments/guidelines_for_traffic_impact_analysisUDO3.pdf.
    15. Bannock Planning Organization, “Traffic Impact Study Guidelines” (produced for
the City of Pocatello, City of Chubbuck, and Bannock County (Idaho), 2006), http://bannock
planning.org/wp-content/uploads/trafficimpactstudy.pdf.
    16. Bannock Planning Organization, “Traffic Impact Study Guidelines.”
    17. Mid-Region Council of Governments and Mid-Region Metropolitan Planning
Organization, “A Profile in Congestion (2012): The 30 Most Congested Corridors in the
Albuquerque Metropolitan Planning Area,” https://www.mrcog-nm.gov/images/stories/
pdf/transportation/CMP/2012-cmp-profile.pdf.
    18. Wilson and Company, “Interchange Access Change Request” (Wilson and Com-
pany, unpublished memo, 2013), 28. The preferred project exhibited higher LOS ratings
than the no-build alternative, ranging between C and F, for freeway, weave junction, and
intersection analysis. Two out of twenty-four ramp junctions measured received a score
of B, with the remaining twenty-two receiving scores of F, D, or C.
    19. Wilson and Company, “Interchange Access Change Request,” 36–45.
    20. Mid-Region Council of Governments, Economic Impact Report (Albuquerque,
NM: 2011), 3, 5.
    21. Karsch v. Camden County Board of Adjustments, 302 S.W.3d 754 (M.O. App. 2010), 11.
    22. Karsch v. Camden County, pdf p. 11.
    23. “Mayor Newsom Reaffirms Commitment to City’s Bike Plan,” US States News,
November 8, 2006.
    24. San Francisco Planning Department, “San Francisco Bicycle Plan Environmental
Impact Report,” vol. 1, V.A. 1-1, 2009.
    25. San Francisco Planning Department, “San Francisco Bicycle Plan,” V.A. 2-6, 240.
    26. Boisjoly and El-Geneidy, “How to Get There?”; David G. Proffitt et al., “Accessibil-
ity Planning,” 1–26.
    27. Geneviève Boisjoly and Ahmed El-Geneidy, Measuring Performance: Accessibility
Metrics in Metropolitan Regions around the World (Washington, DC: Brookings, 2017);
Boisjoly and El-Geneidy, “How to Get There?,” 38–50; Proffitt, et al., “Accessibility Plan-
ning,” 1–26.
    28. Geneviève Boisjoly and Ahmed M. El-Geneidy, “The Insider: A Planners’ Perspec-
tive on Accessibility,” Journal of Transport Geography 64 (2017): 33–43.
    29. Boisjoly and El-Geneidy, “Measuring Performance.”
198         NOTES TO PAGES 149–165


    30. Puget Sound Regional Council, Transportation 2040 Plan (Seattle, WA: Puget
Sound Regional Council, 2010).
    31. Puget Sound Regional Council, Transportation 2040 Plan, G-1.
    32. Puget Sound Regional Council, Transportation 2040 Plan, 65, 81.
    33. Puget Sound Regional Council, Transportation 2040 Plan, 15.
    34. Chicago Metropolitan Agency for Planning, Preferred Regional Scenario; Chicago
Metropolitan Agency for Planning, GO TO 2040: Comprehensive Regional Plan (Chicago:
Chicago Metropolitan Agency for Planning, 2010).
    35. Chicago Metropolitan Agency for Planning, GO TO 2040, 15.
    36. Eric Sundquist, “Virginia DOT’s SMART Scale Project Prioritization Process”
(paper presented at the Transportation Research Board 96th Annual Meeting, Washington
DC, January 8–12, 2017).
    37. Virginia Department of Transportation, Smart Scale Technical Guide (Richmond:
Virginia Department of Transportation, 2016).
    38. Tamara Rollison and Brian Coy, “Gov. McAuliffe Announces Virginia’s First
Prioritization Process Scores Nearly 300 Proposed Transportation Projects,” Virginia
Department of Transportation, January 19, 2016, http://www.virginiadot.org/newsroom/
statewide/2016/gov._mcauliffe_announces_virginias91759.asp.
    39. Garrett Hardin, “The Tragedy of the Commons,” Science 162, no. 3859 (1968):
1243–48.
    40. Enrica Papa and António Ferreira, “‘Moving to Access’ in Transport Planning:
Identifying Barriers, Designing Strategies” (presented at AESOP Congress, Lisbon, July
2017), http://westminsterresearch.wmin.ac.uk/19955/1/AESOP%20Enrica%20Papa%20
Antonio%20Ferreira.pdf.
    41. Transportation Research Board, Highway Capacity Manual (2016).
    42. Ian Lockwood, “ITE Traffic Calming Definition,” ITE Journal 67, no. 7 (1997):
22–24; Institute of Transportation Engineers website on Traffic Calming, http://www.ite.
org/traffic/.
    43. Boisjoly and Ahmed El-Geneidy, “Insider,” 33–43.
    44. Andres Duany and Emily Talen, “Making the Good Easy: The Smart Code Alterna-
tive,” Fordham Urban Law Journal 29 (2001): 1445–68.
    45. International Transport Forum, Linking People and Places: New Ways of Under-
standing Spatial Access in Cities (Paris: International Transport Forum, 2017), https://
www.itf-oecd.org/linking-people-and-places; Scott Campbell, “Green Cities, Growing
Cities, Just Cities?: Urban Planning and the Contradictions of Sustainable Development,”
Journal of the American Planning Association 62, no. 3 (1996): 296–312.
    46. Michiel de Bok and Frank van Oort, “Agglomeration Economies, Accessibility
and the Spatial Choice Behavior of Relocating Firms, Journal of Transport and Land Use
4, no. 1 (2011): 5–24.

APPENDIX A
    1. Levine, Merlin, and Grengs. “Project-Level Accessibility Analysis,” 107–19.
    2. Grengs, et al., “Intermetropolitan Comparison,” 427–43.
    3. Schroeder et al., Manual of Transportation Engineering Studies.
    4. For details on the described procedure, see Levine, Merlin, and Grengs, “Project-
Level Accessibility Analysis,” 107–19.
    5. Nelson, Planner’s Estimating Guide.
    6. Federal Highway Administration, Highway Statistics 2008.
    7. Levine et al., “Does Accessibility Require Density or Speed?,” 157–72.
Bibliography




Accessibility Observatory, Center for Transportation Studies, University of Minnesota.
       Access Across America: Transit 2014 Data, 2014. http://access.umn.edu/data/
       datasets/.
Alonso, William. “A Theory of the Urban Land Market.” In Readings in Urban Eco-
       nomics, edited by Matthew Edel and Jerome Rothenberg, 104–110. New York:
       Macmillan, 1972.
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials and Knovel.
       A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets. 6th. ed. Washington, DC:
       American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, 2011.
Apparicio, Philippe, and Anne-Marie Séguin. “Measuring the Accessibility of Services
       and Facilities for Residents of Public Housing in Montreal.” Urban Studies 43,
       no. 1 (2006): 187–211.
ARC. LCI Transportation Program. Atlanta, GA: Atlanta Regional Commission,
       2010. http://www.atlantaregional.com/land-use/livable-centers-initiative/
       lci-transportation-program.
Arlington County. Additional Performance Measures. Arlington County, Virginia, 2015.
       https://transportation.arlingtonva.us/wp-content/uploads/sites/19/2015/06/
       FY14_Transportation_Performance_Measures_Appendix.pdf.
Auld, Joshua, and Abolfazl Mohammadian. “Planning-Constrained Destination
       Choice in Activity-Based Model: Agent-Based Dynamic Activity Planning and
       Travel Scheduling.” Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation
       Research Board, no. 2254 (2011): 170–79.
Axhausen, Kay W. “Accessibility Long Term Perspectives.” Journal of Transport and
       Land Use 1, no. 2 (2008): 5–22.
Bae, Chang-Hee Christine. “Air Quality and Travel Behavior: Untying the Knot.” Jour-
       nal of the American Planning Association 59, no. 1 (1993): 65–74.
Banister, David. “The Sustainable Mobility Paradigm.” Transport Policy 15, no. 2
       (2008): 73–80.
Banister, David, and Mark Thurstain-Goodwin. “Quantification of the Non-Transport
       Benefits Resulting from Rail Investment.” Journal of Transport Geography 19,
       no. 2 (2011): 212–23.
Bannock Planning Organization. “Traffic Impact Study Guidelines.” Produced for the
       City of Pocatello, City of Chubbuck, and Bannock County (Idaho), 2006. http://
       bannockplanning.org/wp-content/uploads/trafficimpactstudy.pdf.
Bartholomew, Keith, Reid Ewing, and Gail Meakins. “Integrated Transportation
       Scenario Planning.” Environment and Planning FHWA-HEP-10-034 (July 2010):
       1–229.
Baum-Snow, Nathaniel. “Did Highways Cause Suburbanization?” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 122, no. 2 (2007): 775–805.
Ben-Akiva, Moshe E., and Steven E. Lerman. Discrete Choice Analysis: Theory and
       Application to Predict Travel Demand. Vol. 9. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
       1985.



                                                                          199
200         BIBLIOGRAPHY


Benenson, Itzhak, Karel Martens, Yodan Rofé, and Ariela Kwartler. “Public Transport
       versus Private Car: GIS-Based Estimation of Accessibility Applied to the Tel
       Aviv Metropolitan Area.” Annals of Regional Science 47, no. 3 (2011): 499–515.
Bhat, Chandra, Susan Handy, Kara Kockelman, Hani Mahmassani, Qinglin Chen,
       and Lisa Weston. Accessibility Measures: Formulation Considerations and Cur-
       rent Applications. Research Report 4938-2. Austin: Center for Transportation
       Research, Bureau of Engineering Research, University of Texas, 2000.
Bhattacharjee, Sutapa, and Andrew R. Goetz. “Impact of Light Rail on Traffic Conges-
       tion in Denver.” Journal of Transport Geography 22 (2012): 262–70.
Black, John, and Chatherine M. Conroy. “Accessibility Measures and the Social Evalua-
       tion of Urban Structure.” Environment and Planning A 9 (1977): 1013–31.
Blumenberg, Evelyn, and Michael Manville. “Beyond the Spatial Mismatch: Welfare
       Recipients and Transportation Policy.” Journal of Planning Literature 19, no. 2
       (2004): 182–205.
Boarnet, Marlon, and Randall Crane. Travel by Design: The Influence of Urban Form on
       Travel. New York: Oxford University Press, 2001.
Boarnet, Marlon G., and Andrew F. Haughwout. “Do Highways Matter?: Evidence and
       Policy Implications of Highways’ Influence on Metropolitan Development.”
       Berkeley: University of California Transportation Center, 2000.
Boisjoly, Geneviève, and Ahmed M. El-Geneidy. “How to Get There?: A Critical Assess-
       ment of Accessibility Objectives and Indicators in Metropolitan Transportation
       Plans.” Transport Policy 55 (2017): 38–50.
Boisjoly, Geneviève, and Ahmed M. El-Geneidy. “The Insider: A Planners’ Perspective
       on Accessibility.” Journal of Transport Geography 64 (2017): 33–43.
Boisjoly, Geneviève, and Ahmed El-Geneidy. Measuring Performance: Accessibility
       Metrics in Metropolitan Regions around the World. Washington, DC: Brookings,
       2017.
Bonavia, Michael R. The Economics of Transport. London: Cambridge at the University
       Press, 1936.
Boston Region Metropolitan Planning Organization. “Transportation Equity.” In
       Long-Range Transportation Plan of the Boston Region Metropolitan Planning
       Organization: 7-1–7-17. Boston, MA: Boston Region Metropolitan Planning
       Organization, 2015.
Bullard, Robert D., Angel O. Torres, and Glenn S. Johnson, eds. Sprawl City: Race,
       Politics, and Planning in Atlanta. Washington, DC: Island Press, 2000.
Cairns, Shannon, Jessica Greig, and Martin Wachs. Environmental Justice and Trans-
       portation: A Citizen’s Handbook. UCTC No. 620. Berkeley: University of Califor-
       nia Transportation Center, 2003.
CalTrans. Guide for the Preparation of Traffic Impact Studies. Sacramento: Department
       of Transportation, State of California, December 2002.
CalTrans. Performance Measure for Rural Transportation Systems: Guidebook (2006),
       secs. 3-1 and 4-1. http://www.dot.ca.gov/perf/library/pdf/RSPMGuidebook.pdf.
Cambridge Systematics. Technical Methods to Support Analysis of Environmental Justice
       Issues. Cambridge, MA: National Cooperative Highway Research Program,
       2002.
Campbell, Scott. “Green Cities, Growing Cities, Just Cities?: Urban Planning and the
       Contradictions of Sustainable Development.” Journal of the American Planning
       Association 62, no. 3 (1996): 296–312.
Casas, Irene. “Evaluating the Importance of Accessibility to Congestion Response
       Using a GIS-Based Travel Simulator.” Journal of Geographical Systems 5, no. 1
       (2003): 109–27.
                                                              BIBLIOGRAPHY           201


Cervero, Robert. “Bus Rapid Transit (BRT): An Efficient and Competitive Mode of Pub-
       lic Transport.” Working Paper 2013-01. Berkeley: Institute of Urban and Regional
       Development, University of California. http://iurd.berkeley.edu/wp/2013-01.pdf.
Cervero, Robert. “Jobs-Housing Balancing and Regional Mobility.” Journal of the
       American Planning Association 55, no. 2 (1989): 136–50.
Cervero, Robert. Paradigm Shift: From Automobility to Accessibility Planning. Working
       Paper 677. Berkeley: Institute of Urban and Regional Development, University
       of California, 1996.
Cervero, Robert. The Transit Metropolis: A Global Inquiry. Washington, DC: Island
       Press, 1998.
Cervero, Robert, and Jin Murakami. “Effects of Built Environments on Vehicle Miles
       Traveled: Evidence from 370 US Urbanized Areas.” Environment and Planning A
       42, no. 2 (2010): 400–418.
Chatman, Daniel G. “Residential Choice, the Built Environment, and Nonwork Travel:
       Evidence Using New Data and Methods.” Environment and Planning A 41, no. 5
       (2009): 1072–89.
Chen, Cynthia. The Temporal and Social Dimension of Accessibility for New York City
       Residents. RF 49777-13-18. New York: University Transportation Research Cen-
       ter, City College of New York, 2008.
Chen, Jason, Cynthia Chen, and Harry Timmermans. “Accessibility Trade-Offs in
       Household Residential Location Decisions.” Transportation Research Record:
       Journal of the Transportation Research Board, no. 2077 (2008): 71–79.
Cheng, Jianquan Q., Luca Bertolini, and Frank le Clercq. “Measuring Sustainable
       Accessibility.” Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation
       Research Board, no. 2017 (2007): 16–25.
Cheshire, Paul, and Stephen Sheppard. “On the Price of Land and the Value of Ameni-
       ties.” Economica 62, no. 246 (1995): 247–67.
Chicago Metropolitan Agency for Planning. GO TO 2040: Comprehensive Regional
       Plan. Chicago: Chicago Metropolitan Agency for Planning, 2010.
Chicago Metropolitan Agency for Planning. Preferred Regional Scenario. Chicago:
       Chicago Metropolitan Agency for Planning, 2008.
Claritas, Inc. Claritas Business-Facts Methodology. Ithaca, NY: Claritas, 2002.
Clinton, William J. Executive Order No. 12898: Federal Actions to Address Environmen-
       tal Justice in Minority Populations and Low-Income Populations. Federal Register
       59:7629 (1994).
Cournot, Augustin. Researches into the Mathematical Principles of the Theory of Wealth.
       Translated by Nathaniel T. Bacon with a Bibliography of Mathematical Eco-
       nomics by Irving Fisher. 1838. Reprint, New York: MacMillan, 1897.
Crane, Randall. “Counterpoint: Accessibility and Sprawl.” Journal of Transport and
       Land Use 1, no. 1 (2008): 13–19.
Crane, Randall. “On Form versus Function: Will the New Urbanism Reduce Traffic, or
       Increase It?” Journal of Planning Education and Research 15, no. 2 (1996): 117–26.
Currie, Graham. “Bus Transit Oriented Development—Strengths and Challenges Rela-
       tive to Rail.” Journal of Public Transportation 9, no. 4 (2006): 1–21.
Dalumpines, Ron, and Darren M. Scott. “Determinants of Route Choice Behavior: A
       Comparison of Shop versus Work Trips Using the Potential Path Area-Gateway
       (PPAG) Algorithm and Path-Size Logit.” Journal of Transport Geography 59
       (2017): 59–68.
de Bok, Michiel, and Frank van Oort. “Agglomeration Economies, Accessibility and the
       Spatial Choice Behavior of Relocating Firms. Journal of Transport and Land Use
       4, no. 1 (2011): 5–24.
202         BIBLIOGRAPHY


de Souza Briggs, Xavier, ed. The Geography of Opportunity: Race and Housing Choice in
      Metropolitan America. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 2005.
Deakin, Elizabeth. “Equity and Environmental Justice in Sustainable Transporta-
      tion: Toward a Research Agenda.” In Institutions and Sustainable Transport:
      Regulatory Reform in Advanced Economies, edited by Piet Rietveld and Roger R.
      Stough, 51–69. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2007.
Deka, Devajyoti. “Social and Environmental Justice Issues in Urban Transportation.”
      In The Geography of Urban Transportation, edited by Susan Hanson and Gen-
      evieve Giuliano, 332–55. 3rd ed. New York: Guilford Press, 2004.
Dodson, Jago, Matthew Burke, Rick Evans, Brendan Gleeson, and Neil Sipe. “Travel
      Behavior Patterns of Different Socially Disadvantaged Groups: Analysis of
      Household Travel Survey Data for a Dispersed Metropolitan Area.” Transporta-
      tion Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, no. 2163
      (2010): 24–31.
Dreier, Peter, John H. Mollenkopf, and Todd Swanstrom. Place Matters: Metropolitics
      for the Twenty-First Century. 2nd ed. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas,
      2004.
Du, Hongbo, and Corinne Mulley. “Relationship between Transport Accessibility and
      Land Value: Local Model Approach with Geographically Weighted Regression.”
      Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board,
      no. 1977 (2006): 197–205.
Duany, Andres, and Emily Talen. “Making the Good Easy: The Smart Code Alterna-
      tive.” Fordham Urban Law Journal 29 (2001): 1445–68.
Dupuit, Jules. “On the Measurement of the Utility of Public Works.” In Readings in
      Welfare Economics, by Kenneth J. Arrow and Tibor Scitovsky. Homewood, IL:
      Richard D. Irwin, 1969. Selected by a committee of the American Economic
      Association. Translated in International Economic Papers 2 (1952): 83–110.
      English translation by R. H. Barback from “De la Mesure de l’Utilité des
      Travaux Publics,” Annales des Ponts et Chausées, 2nd ser., vol. 8, 1844.
Duranton, Gilles, and Erick Guerra. Developing a Common Narrative on Urban Acces-
      sibility: An Urban Planning Perspective. Washington DC: Brookings, 2016.
Echenique, Marcial H., Anthony J. Hargreaves, Gordon Mitchell, and Anil Namdeo.
      “Does Urban Form Really Matter?” Journal of the American Planning Association
      78, no. 2 (2012): 121–37.
Edwards, John D., Jr. Transportation Planning Handbook. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
      Prentice-Hall, 1992.
Envision Utah. Wasatch Choices 2040: A Four County Land-Use and Transportation
      Vision. Salt Lake City, UT: Envision Utah, 2006.
Ermagun, Alireza, and David Levinson. “Accessibility and Transit Performance.”
      Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Nexus Working Papers 000129 (2015).
      https://conservancy.umn.edu/bitstream/handle/11299/179832/Accessibility-
      TransitPerformance.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y.
Ettema, Dick, and Harry Timmermans. “Space-Time Accessibility under Conditions
      of Uncertain Travel Times: Theory and Numerical Simulations.” Geographical
      Analysis 39, no. 2 (2007): 217–40.
Ewing, Reid. “Characteristics, Causes, and Effects of Sprawl: A Literature Review.”
      Urban Ecology 21, no. 2 (1994): 519–35.
Ewing, Reid. “Measuring Transportation Performance.” Transportation Quarterly 49,
      no. 1 (1995): 91–104.
Ewing, Reid, and Robert Cervero. “Travel and the Built Environment: A Meta-Analysis.”
      Journal of the American Planning Association 76, no. 3 (2010): 265–94.
                                                             BIBLIOGRAPHY          203


Ewing, Reid, Shima Hamidi, Guang Tian, David Proffitt, Stefania Tonin, and Laura
       Fregolent. “Testing Newman and Kenworthy’s Theory of Density and Automo-
       bile Dependence.” Journal of Planning Education and Research 38, no. 2 (2017):
       167–82.
Ewing, Reid, Rolf Pendall, and Don Chen. Sprawl Scores for 83 Metropolitan Regions.
       Washington, DC: Smart Growth America, 2002.
Fan, Yingling. “Household Structure and Gender Differences in Travel Time: Spouse/
       Partner Presence, Parenthood, and Breadwinner Status.” Transportation 44,
       no. 2 (2017): 271–91.
Fan, Yingling, Andrew E. Guthrie, and David M. Levinson. “Impact of Light Rail
       Implementation on Labor Market Accessibility: A Transportation Equity Per-
       spective.” Journal of Transport and Land Use 5, no. 3 (2012): 28–39.
Farber, Steven, Melinda Z. Morang, and Michael J. Widener. “Temporal Variability
       in Transit-Based Accessibility to Supermarkets.” Applied Geography 53 (2014):
       149–59.
Farrington, John, and Conor Farrington. “Rural Accessibility, Social Inclusion and
       Social Justice: Towards Conceptualisation.” Journal of Transport Geography 13,
       no. 1 (2005): 1–12.
Federal Highway Administration. Highway Functional Classification Concepts, Criteria
       and Procedures (U.S. Department of Transportation). Accessed September 19,
       2016. https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/planning/processes/statewide/related/highway_
       functional_classifications/section02.cfm.
Federal Highway Administration. Highway Statistics 2008. Washington, DC: Bureau of
       Highway Statistics, 2008. https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/policyinformation/statistics/
       2008/vm1.cfm.
Federal Transit Administration. FTA Circular 4702.1A: Title VI and Title VI–Dependent
       Guidelines for Federal Transit Administration Recipients. Washington, DC: U.S.
       Department of Transportation, 2007.
Federal Transit Administration. FTA Circular 4702.1B: Title VI Requirements and
       Guidelines for Federal Transit Administration Recipients. Washington, DC: U.S.
       Department of Transportation, 2012.
Ferguson, Erin M., Jennifer Duthie, Avinash Unnikrishnan, and S. Travis Waller.
       “Incorporating Equity into the Transit Frequency-Setting Problem.” Transporta-
       tion Research Part A 46, no. 1 (2012): 190–99.
Flyvbjerg, Bent. Making Social Science Matter: Why Social Inquiry Fails and How It Can
       Succeed Again. New York: Cambridge University Press. 2001.
Forkenbrock, David J., and Lisa A. Schweitzer. “Environmental Justice in Transporta-
       tion Planning.” Journal of the American Planning Association 65, no. 1 (1999):
       96–111.
Forkenbrock, David J., and Glen E. Weisbrod. Guidebook for Estimating the Social and
       Economic Effects of Transportation Projects. NCHRP Report 456. Washington,
       DC: National Academy Press, 2001.
Foth, Nicole, Kevin Manaugh, and Ahmed M. El-Geneidy. “Towards Equitable Transit:
       Examining Transit Accessibility and Social Need in Toronto, Canada, 1996–2006.”
       Journal of Transport Geography 29 (2013): 1–10.
Galster, George, Royce Hanson, Michael R. Ratcliffe, Harold Wolman, Stephen
       Coleman, and Jason Freihage. “Wrestling Sprawl to the Ground: Defining
       and Measuring an Elusive Concept.” Housing Policy Debate 12, no. 4 (2001):
       681–717.
Garrett, Mark, and Brian Taylor. “Reconsidering Social Equity in Public Transit.”
       Berkeley Planning Journal 13 (1999): 6–27.
204         BIBLIOGRAPHY


Geurs, Karst T., Michiel de Bok, and Barry Zondag. “Accessibility Benefits of Inte-
       grating Land Use and Public Transport Policy Plans in the Netherlands.” In
       Accessibility Analysis and Transport Planning: Challenges for Europe and North
       America, edited by Karst T. Geurs, Kevin J. Krizek, and Aura Reggiani, 135–53.
       Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2012.
Geurs, Karst T., and Bert van Wee. “Accessibility Evaluation of Land-Use and Trans-
       port Strategies: Review and Research Directions.” Journal of Transport Geogra-
       phy 12, no. 2 (2004): 127–40.
Ghosh, Avijit, and C. Samuel Craig. “Formulating Retail Location Strategy in a Chang-
       ing Environment.” Journal of Marketing 47, no. 3 (1983): 53–68.
Giuliano, Genevieve. “Travel, Location and Race/Ethnicity.” Transportation Research
       Part A 37, no. 4 (2003): 351–72.
Gjestland, Arnstein, David McArthur, Liv Osland, and Inge Thorsen. “A Bridge over
       Troubled Waters: Valuing Accessibility Effects of a New Bridge.” In Accessibil-
       ity Analysis and Transport Planning: Challenges for Europe and North America,
       edited by Karst T. Geurs, Kevin J. Krizek, and Aura Reggiani, 173–92. Chelten-
       ham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2012.
Glaeser, Edward L., Matthew E. Kahn, and Jordan Rappaport. “Why Do the Poor Live
       in Cities: The Role of Public Transportation.” Journal of Urban Economics 63,
       no. 1 (2008): 1–24.
Gobillon, Laurent, Harris Selod, and Yves Zenou. “The Mechanisms of Spatial Mis-
       match.” Urban Studies 44, no. 12 (2007): 2401–27.
Golub, Aaron, Richard A. Marcantonio, and Thomas W. Sanchez. “Race, Space, and
       Struggles for Mobility.” Urban Geography 34, no. 5 (2013): 699–728.
Golub, Aaron, Glenn Robinson, and Brendan Nee. “Making Accessibility Analyses
       Accessible: A Tool to Facilitate the Public Review of the Effects of Regional
       Transportation Plans on Accessibility.” Journal of Transport and Land Use 6,
       no. 3 (2013): 17–28.
Gong, Jianxin. “Clarifying the Standard Deviational Ellipse.” Geographical Analysis 34,
       no. 2 (2002): 155–67.
Gordon, Peter, Ajay Kumar, and Harry W. Richardson. “Beyond the Journey to Work.”
       Transportation Research Part A 22, no. 6 (1988): 419–26.
Governor’s Office of Planning and Research (CA). “Revised Proposal on Updates to
       the CEQA Guidelines on Evaluating Transportation Impacts in CEQA.” Sacra-
       mento, CA, 2016. https://www.opr.ca.gov/docs/Revised_VMT_CEQA_Guide
       lines_Proposal_January_20_2016.pdf.
Grengs, Joe. “Community-Based Planning as a Source of Political Change: The Transit
       Equity Movement of Los Angeles’ Bus Riders Union.” Journal of the American
       Planning Association 68, no. 2 (2002): 165–78.
Grengs, Joe. “Comparing People and Places with Transportation Accessibility in Met-
       ropolitan Detroit.” In Mapping Detroit: Land, Community, and Shaping a City,
       edited by June M. Thomas and Henco Bekkering, 101–14. Detroit, MI: Wayne
       State University Press, 2015.
Grengs, Joe. “Equity and the Social Distribution of Job Accessibility in Detroit.” Envi-
       ronment and Planning B 39, no. 5 (2012): 785–800.
Grengs, Joe. “Job Accessibility and the Modal Mismatch in Detroit.” Journal of Trans-
       port Geography 18, no. 1 (2010): 42–54.
Grengs, Joe. “Measuring Change in Small-Scale Transit Accessibility with Geographic
       Information Systems: The Cases of Buffalo and Rochester.” Transportation
       Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, no. 1887 (2004):
       10–17.
                                                              BIBLIOGRAPHY          205


Grengs, Joe. “Nonwork Accessibility as a Social Equity Indicator.” International Journal
      of Sustainable Transportation 9, no. 1 (2015): 1–14.
Grengs. Joe, Jonathan Levine, Qing Shen, and Qingyun Shen. “Intermetropolitan
      Comparison of Transportation Accessibility: Sorting Out Mobility and Proxim-
      ity in San Francisco and Washington, DC.” Journal of Planning Education and
      Research 29, no. 4 (2010): 427–43.
Guerra, Erick. “Valuing Rail Transit: Comparing Capital and Operating Costs with
      Consumer Benefits.” Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transporta-
      tion Research Board, no. 2219 (2011): 50–58.
“Guidelines for Traffic Impact Analysis (Zoning Petitions).” Wake County, North
      Carolina. Accessed February 1, 2019. http://www.wakegov.com/planning/zoning/
      Documents/guidelines_for_traffic_impact_analysisUDO3.pdf.
Gulhan, Gorkem, Huseyin Ceylan, Ozgur Baskan, and Halim Ceylan. “Using Poten-
      tial Accessibility Measure for Urban Public Transportation Planning: A Case
      Study of Denizli, Turkey.” PROMET–Traffic & Transportation 26, no. 2 (2014):
      129–37.
Gutman, Jeffrey, and Adie Tomer. Developing a Common Narrative on Urban Acces-
      sibility: Overview. Moving to Access. Washington, DC: Brookings, 2016. https://
      www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/overview-digital.pdf.
Habib, Muhammad A., and Eric J. Miller. “Reference-Dependent Residential Location
      Choice Model within a Relocation Context.” Transportation Research Record:
      Journal of the Transportation Research Board, no. 2133 (2009): 92–99.
Hägerstrand, Torsten. “What About People in Regional Science?” Papers in Regional
      Science 24, no. 1 (1970): 6–21.
Haig, Robert M. “The Assignment of Activities to Areas in Urban Regions.” In Regional
      Survey of New York and Its Environs, 1:31–44. New York: Regional Survey, 1927.
      Originally published in Quarterly Journal of Economics 40 (1926): 402–34.
Haig, Robert M. Major Economic Factors in Metropolitan Growth and Its Arrangement:
      A Study of Trends and Tendencies in the Economic Activities within the Region of
      New York and Its Environs. New York: Committee on Regional Plan of New York
      and Its Environs, 1927.
Halden, Derek. “The Use and Abuse of Accessibility Measures in UK Passenger Trans-
      port Planning.” Research in Transportation Business & Management 2 (2011):
      12–19.
Halden, Derek. “Using Accessibility Measures to Integrate Land Use and Transport
      Policy in Edinburgh and the Lothians.” Transport Policy 9, no. 4 (2002): 313–24.
Hamidi, Shima, Reid Ewing, Ilana Preuss, and Alex Dodds. “Measuring Sprawl and
      Its Impacts: An Update.” Journal of Planning Education and Research 35, no. 1
      (2015): 35–50.
Handy, Susan L. Accessibility- vs. Mobility-Enhancing Strategies for Addressing Automo-
      bile Dependence in the U.S. UCD-ITS-RR-02-15. Davis: Institute of Transporta-
      tion Studies, University of California, 2002.
Handy, Susan L., and Deb A. Niemeier. “Measuring Accessibility: An Exploration
      of Issues and Alternatives.” Environment and Planning A 29, no. 7 (1997):
      1175–94.
Hansen, Walter G. “How Accessibility Shapes Land Use.” Journal of the American Plan-
      ning Association 25, no. 2 (1959): 73–76.
Hansen, Willard B. “An Approach to the Analysis of Metropolitan Residential Exten-
      sion.” Journal of Regional Science 3, no. 1 (1961): 37–55.
Hardin, Garrett. “The Tragedy of the Commons.” Science 162, no. 3859 (1968):
      1243–48.
206         BIBLIOGRAPHY


Hatzopoulou, Marianne, and Eric J. Miller. “Institutional Integration for Sustainable
       Transportation Policy in Canada.” Transport Policy 15, no. 3 (2008): 149–62.
Hau, Timothy D. Economic Fundamentals of Road Pricing. Washington, DC: Infrastruc-
       ture and Urban Development Department, World Bank, WPS 1070, 1992.
Hay, Alan. “Equity and Welfare in the Geography of Public Transport Provision.” Jour-
       nal of Transport Geography 1, no. 2 (1993): 95–101.
Hayes, M. Cordey, and Alan G. Wilson. “Spatial Interaction.” Socio-Economic Planning
       Sciences 5, no. 1 (1971): 73–95.
Heilig, Michael, Nicolai Mallig, Tim Hilgert, Martin Kagerbauer, and Peter Vortisch.
       “Large-Scale Application of a Combined Destination and Mode Choice Model
       Estimated with Mixed Stated and Revealed Preference Data.” Transportation
       Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, no. 2669 (2017):
       31–40.
Hensher, David A. “Measurement of the Valuation of Travel Time Savings.” Journal of
       Transport Economics and Policy 35, no. 1 (2001): 71–98.
Hess, Daniel B. “Access to Employment for Adults in Poverty in the Buffalo-Niagara
       Region.” Urban Studies 42, no. 7 (2005): 1177–200.
Hess, Daniel B., Jeffrey Brown, and Donald Shoup. “Waiting for the Bus.” Journal of
       Public Transportation 7, no. 4 (2004): 67–84.
Hess, Daniel B., Brian Taylor, and Allison Yoh. “Light Rail Lite or Cost-Effective
       Improvements to Bus Service?: Evaluating Costs of Implementing Bus Rapid
       Transit.” Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research
       Board, no. 1927 (2005): 22–30.
Higgins, Christopher, Mark Ferguson, and Pavlos Kanaroglou. “Light Rail and Land
       Use Change: Rail Transit’s Role in Reshaping and Revitalizing Cities.” Journal of
       Public Transportation 17, no. 2 (2014): 93–112.
Hill, Donald M. “A Growth Allocation Model for the Boston Region.” Journal of the
       American Institute of Planners 31, no. 2 (1965): 111–20.
Hodge, David C. “My Fair Share: Equity Issues in Urban Transportation.” In The Geog-
       raphy of Urban Transportation, edited by Susan Hanson, 359–75. 2nd ed. New
       York: Guilford Press, 1995.
Holzer, Harry. “The Spatial Mismatch Hypothesis: What Has the Evidence Shown?”
       Urban Studies 28, no. 1 (1991): 105–22.
Horner, Mark W. “Exploring Metropolitan Accessibility and Urban Structure.” Urban
       Geography 25, no. 3 (2004): 264–84.
Houseman, Gerald L. The Right of Mobility. Port Washington, NY: Kennikat Press,
       1979.
Hu, Lingqian. “Job Accessibility of the Poor in Los Angeles.” Journal of the American
       Planning Association 81, no. 1 (2015): 30–45.
Hupkes, Geurt. “The Law of Constant Travel Time and Trip-Rates.” Futures 14, no. 1
       (1982): 38–46.
Hurd, Richard M. Principles of City Land Values. New York: Record and Guide, 1903.
Ingram, David R. “The Concept of Accessibility: A Search for an Operational Form.”
       Regional Studies 5, no. 2 (1971): 101–7.
Innes, Judith E. “Information in Communicative Planning.” Journal of the American
       Planning Association 68 (1998): 52–63.
Institute for Transportation and Development Policy. The Bus Rapid Transit Stan-
       dard. New York, 2016. https://www.itdp.org/library/standards-and-guides/
       the-bus-rapid-transit-standard/the-scorecard/.
Institute of Transportation Engineers. Website on Traffic Calming. http://www.ite.org/
       traffic/.
                                                               BIBLIOGRAPHY           207


Institute of Transportation Engineers. Traffic Engineering Handbook. Hoboken, NJ:
        Wiley, 2016.
Institute of Transportation Engineers. Transportation Impact Analyses for Site Develop-
        ment: An ITE Recommended Practice. Washington, DC, 2010.
International Transport Forum. Linking People and Places: New Ways of Understand-
        ing Spatial Access in Cities. Paris: International Transport Forum, 2017. https://
        www.itf-oecd.org/linking-people-and-places.
Isard, Walter, Methods of Regional Analysis: An Introduction to Regional Science. Cam-
        bridge, MA: MIT Press, 1960.
Jaffe, Eric. “Explaining Transit’s Secret Language.” CityLab (March 8, 2012). https://
        www.citylab.com/transportation/2012/03/teaching-language-transit/1438/.
Jain, Juliet, and Glen Lyons. “The Gift of Travel Time.” Journal of Transport Geography
        16, no. 2 (2008): 81–89.
Johnston-Anumonwo, Ibipo. “Racial Differences in the Commuting Behavior of
        Women in Buffalo, 1980–1990.” Urban Geography 16, no. 1 (1995): 23–45.
Kain, John F. “The Spatial Mismatch Hypothesis: Three Decades Later.” Housing Policy
        Debate 3, no. 2 (1992): 371–460.
Karner, Alex, and Deb A. Niemeier. “Civil Rights Guidance and Equity Analysis
        Methods for Regional Transportation Plans: A Critical Review of Literature and
        Practice.” Journal of Transport Geography 33 (2013): 126–34.
Karsch v. Camden County Board of Adjustments. 302 S.W.3d 754 (M.O. App. 2010), 11.
Kawabata, Mizuki. “Spatiotemporal Dimensions of Modal Accessibility Disparity
        in Boston and San Francisco.” Environment and Planning A 41, no. 1 (2009):
        183–98.
Kawabata, Mizuki, and Qing Shen. “Commuting Inequality between Cars and Public
        Transit: The Case of the San Francisco Bay Area, 1990–2000.” Urban Studies 44,
        no. 9 (2007): 1759–80.
Kawabata, Mizuki, and Qing Shen. “Job Accessibility as an Indicator of Auto-Oriented
        Urban Structure: A Comparison of Boston and Los Angeles with Tokyo.” Envi-
        ronment and Planning B 33, no. 1 (2006): 115–30.
Krause, Andy L., and Christopher Bitter. “Spatial Econometrics, Land Values, and
        Sustainability: Trends in Real Estate Valuation Research.” Supplement, Cities 29,
        no. 2 (2012): S19–25.
Krizek, Kevin J. “Operationalizing Neighborhood Accessibility for Land Use–Travel
        Behavior Research and Regional Modeling.” Journal of Planning Education and
        Research 22, no. 3 (2003): 270–87.
Kwan, Mei-Po. “Space-Time and Integral Measures of Individual Accessibility: A
        Comparative Analysis Using a Point-Based Framework.” Geographical Analysis
        30, no. 3 (1998): 191–216.
Kwan, Mei-Po, and Joe Weber. “Scale and Accessibility: Implications for the Analysis of
        Land Use–Travel Interaction.” Applied Geography 28, no. 2 (2008): 110–23.
Kwok, Rebecca C. W., and Anthony G. O. Yeh. “The Use of Modal Accessibility Gap as
        an Indicator for Sustainable Transport Development.” Environment and Plan-
        ning A 36 (2004): 921–36.
Lansing, John B., Robert W. Marans, and Robert B. Zehner. Planned Residential Envi-
        ronments. Ann Arbor, MI: Survey Research Center, Institute for Social Research,
        1970.
Leathers, Nancy J. “Residential Location and Mode of Transportation to Work: A
        Model of Choice.” Transportation Research 1, no. 2 (1967): 129–55.
Lee, Brian H. Y., Paul Waddell, Liming Wang, and Ram M. Pendyala. “Reexamining the
        Influence of Work and Nonwork Accessibility on Residential Location Choices
208         BIBLIOGRAPHY


       with a Microanalytic Framework.” Environment and Planning A 42, no. 4 (2010):
       913–30.
Lee, Bumsoo. “‘Edge’ or ‘Edgeless’ Cities?: Urban Spatial Structure in US Metropolitan
       Areas, 1980 to 2000.” Journal of Regional Science 47, no. 3 (2007): 479–515.
Levine, Jonathan. “Is Bus versus Rail Investment a Zero-Sum Game?: The Misuse of
       the Opportunity-Cost Concept.” Journal of the American Planning Association
       79, no. 1 (2013): 5–15.
Levine, Jonathan. “Urban Transportation and Social Equity: Transportation-Planning
       Paradigms That Impede Policy Reform.” In Policy, Planning, and People: Pro-
       moting Justice in Urban Development, edited by Naomi Carmon and Susan S.
       Fainstein, 141–60. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2013.
Levine, Jonathan. Zoned Out: Regulations, Market, and Choices in Transportation and
       Metropolitan Land Use. Washington, DC: Resources for the Future, 2006.
Levine, Jonathan, Joe Grengs, Qingyun Shen, and Qing Shen. “Does Accessibil-
       ity Require Density or Speed?: A Comparison of Fast versus Close in Getting
       Where You Want to Go in U.S. Metropolitan Regions.” Journal of the American
       Planning Association 78, no. 2 (2012): 157–72.
Levine, Jonathan, Joe Grengs, Qingyun Shen, and Qing Shen, Metropolitan Accessibil-
       ity and Transportation Sustainability: Comparative Indicators for Policy Reform.
       Final Report from EPA Agreement Number: RD-833334901-0 and FHWA
       Cooperative Agreement Number: DTFH61-07-H-00037, January 2011. http://
       hdl.handle.net/2027.42/147459.
Levine, Jonathan, Louis Merlin, and Joe Grengs. “Project-Level Accessibility Analy-
       sis for Land-Use Planning.” Transport Policy 53 (2017): 107–19. https://doi.
       org/10.1016/j.tranpol.2016.09.005.
Levinson, David, Bernadette Marion, and Michael Iacono. Access to Destinations,
       Phase 3: Measuring Accessibility by Automobile. Mn/DOT 2010-09. Minneapolis:
       Department of Civil Engineering, University of Minnesota, 2010.
Levinson, David M., Wes Marshall, and Kay Axhausen. Elements of Access: Transport
       Planning for Engineers, Transport Engineering for Planners. Sydney: Network
       Design Laboratory, 2017.
Lindblom, Charles E. “The Science of ‘Muddling Through.’” Public Administration
       Review 19, no. 2 (1959): 79–88.
Litman, Todd. “Evaluating Transportation Equity.” World Transport Policy and Practice
       8, no. 2 (2002): 50–65.
Lockwood, Ian. “ITE Traffic Calming Definition.” ITE Journal 67, no. 7 (1997): 22–24.
Lovelady, Adam. “MPOs and the Integration of Transportation and Land Use Plan-
       ning.” Virginia Environmental Law Journal 27, no. 3 (2009): 275–320.
Lowe, Kate, and Joe Grengs. “Private Donations for Public Transit: The Equity Impli-
       cations of Detroit’s Public-Private Streetcar.” Journal of Planning Education and
       Research (March 13, 2018). https://doi.org/10.1177/0739456X18761237.
Lucas, Karen. “A Critical Assessment of Accessibility Planning for Social Inclusion.” In
       Accessibility Analysis and Transport Planning: Challenges for Europe and North
       America, edited by Karst T. Geurs, Kevin J. Krizek, and Aura Reggiani, 228–42.
       Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2012.
Lucas, Karen. “Transport and Social Exclusion: Where Are We Now?” Transport Policy
       20 (2012): 105–13.
Luo, Wei, and Fahui Yang. “Measures of Spatial Accessibility to Healthcare in a GIS
       Environment: Synthesis and a Case Study in the Chicago Region.” Environment
       and Planning B, no. 3 (2003): 865–84.
                                                             BIBLIOGRAPHY          209


Ma, Kang-Rae, and David Banister. “Excess Commuting: A Critical Review.” Transport
      Reviews 26, no. 6 (2006): 749–67.
MacKinnon, Ross D., and M. John Hodgson. “Optimal Transportation Networks:
      A Case Study of Highway Systems.” Environment and Planning 2, no. 3 (1970):
      267–84.
Manaugh, Kevin, Madhav G. Badami, and Ahmed M. El-Geneidy. “Integrating Social
      Equity into Urban Transportation Planning: A Critical Evaluation of Equity
      Objectives and Measures in Transportation Plans in North America.” Transport
      Policy 37 (2015): 167–76.
Mann, Eric. “Confronting Transit Racism in Los Angeles.” In Just Transportation:
      Dismantling Race and Class Barriers to Mobility, edited by Robert D. Bullard and
      Glenn S. Johnson, 68–83. Gabriola Island, BC: New Society, 1997.
Marshall, Alfred, Principles of Economics. New York: Macmillan, 1895.
Martens, Karel. “Justice in Transport as Justice in Accessibility: Applying Walzer’s
      ‘Spheres of Justice’ to the Transport Sector.” Transportation 39, no. 6 (2012):
      1035–53.
Martens, Karel. Transport Justice: Designing Fair Transportation Systems. New York:
      Routledge, 2017.
Martens, Karel, Aaron Golub, and Glenn Robinson. “A Justice-Theoretic Approach to
      the Distribution of Transportation Benefits: Implications for Transportation
      Planning Practice in the United States.” Transportation Research Part A 46, no. 4
      (2012): 684–95.
Martin, Juan Carlos, and Aura Reggiani. “Recent Methodological Developments to
      Measure Spatial Interaction: Synthetic Accessibility Indices Applied to High-
      Speed Train Investments.” Transport Reviews 27, no. 5 (2007): 551–71.
Massey, Douglas S., and Nancy A. Denton. American Apartheid: Segregation and the
      Making of the Underclass. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1993.
McIntosh, James, Roman Trubka, Jeff Kenworthy, and Peter Newman. “The Role of
      Urban Form and Transit in City Car Dependence: Analysis of 26 Global Cities
      from 1960 to 2000.” Transportation Research Part D 33 (2014): 95–110.
Merlin, Louis A. “Measuring Community Completeness: Jobs Housing Balance,
      Accessibility, and Convenient Local Access to Nonwork Destinations.” Envi-
      ronment and Planning B 41, no. 4 (2014): 736–56. http://doi.org/10.1068/
      b120010p.
Merlin, Louis A. “A Portrait of Accessibility Change for Four US Metropolitan Areas.”
      Journal of Transport and Land Use 10, no. 1 (2017): 309–36. http://dx.doi.
      org/10.5198/jtlu.2015.808.
Merlin, Louis A., and Lingqian Hu. “Does Competition Matter in Measures of Job
      Accessibility?: Explaining Employment in Los Angeles.” Unpublished manu-
      script, 2017.
Merlin, Louis A., Jonathan Levine, and Joe Grengs. “Accessibility Analysis for Trans-
      portation Projects and Plans.” Transport Policy 69 (2018): 35–48.
Metropolitan Transportation Commission. Transportation 2035 Plan for the San Fran-
      cisco Bay Area: Equity Analysis Report. Oakland, CA: Metropolitan Transporta-
      tion Commission, 2009.
Metropolitan Planning Commission and Association of Bay Area Governments.
      Equity Analysis Report: Plan Bay Area 2040 Final Supplemental Report (San
      Francisco: Metropolitan Transportation Commission and Association of Bay
      Area Governments, 2017). http://2040.planbayarea.org/sites/default/files/2017-
      07/Equity_Report_PBA%202040%20_7-2017.pdf.
210         BIBLIOGRAPHY


Metropolitan Transportation Commission and Association of Bay Area Governments,
       Bay Area Census. http://www.bayareacensus.ca.gov/transportation/Commutetime
       19802000.htm.
Metz, David. “The Myth of Travel Time Saving.” Transport Reviews 28, no. 3 (2008):
       321–36.
Meyer, Jonas, Henrik Becker, Patrick M. Bosch, and Kay W. Axhausen.“Autonomous
       Vehicles: The Next Jump in Accessibilities?” Research in Transportation Econom-
       ics 62 (2017): 80–90.
Meyer, Michael D., and Eric J. Miller. Urban Transportation Planning: A Decision-
       Oriented Approach. 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001.
Mid-America Regional Council. Environmental Justice Analysis. Kansas City, MO:
       Mid-America Regional Council, 2013.
Mid-Ohio Regional Planning Commission. “Appendix D: Environmental Justice
       Technical Analysis.” In 2012–2035 Metropolitan Transportation Plan. Columbus:
       Mid-Ohio Regional Planning Commission, 2012.
Mid-Region Council of Governments. Economic Impact Report. Albuquerque, NM,
       2011.
Mid-Region Council of Governments and Mid-Region Metropolitan Planning Orga-
       nization. “A Profile in Congestion (2012): The 30 Most Congested Corridors
       in the Albuquerque Metropolitan Planning Area.” https://www.mrcog-nm.gov/
       images/stories/pdf/transportation/CMP/2012-cmp-profile.pdf.
Milakis, Dimitris, Robert Cervero, and Bert van Wee. “Stay Local or Go Regional?:
       Urban Form Effects on Vehicle Use at Different Spatial Scales: A Theoretical
       Concept and Its Application to the San Francisco Bay Area.” Journal of Transport
       and Land Use 8, no. 2 (2015): 59–86.
Mill, John Stuart. On Liberty. 1859. Reprint, New York: Penguin Press, 1985.
Miller, Harvey J. “Measuring Space-Time Accessibility Benefits within Transportation
       Networks: Basic Theory and Computational Procedures.” Geographical Analysis
       31, no. 1 (1999): 1–26.
Mills, Scott G., and Sieglinde K. Neuhauser. “Quantitative Methods for Environ-
       mental Justice Assessment of Transportation.” Risk Analysis 20, no. 3 (2000):
       377–84.
Minnesota Population Center. National Historical Geographic Information System.
       Version 2.0. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, 2011. http://www.
       nhgis.org.
Minocha, Inshu, P. S. Sriraj, Paul Metaxatos, and Piyushimita (Vonu) Thakuriah.
       “Analysis of Transit Quality of Service and Employment Accessibility for the
       Greater Chicago, Illinois, Region.” Transportation Research Record: Journal of the
       Transportation Research Board, no. 2042 (2008): 20–29.
Mitchell, Robert B., and Chester Rapkin. Urban Traffic: A Function of Land Use. New
       York: Columbia University Press, 1954.
Mohammad, Sara I., Daniel J. Graham, Patricia C. Melo, and Richard J. Anderson.
       “A Meta-Analysis of the Impact of Rail Projects on Land and Property Values.”
       Transportation Research A 50 (2013): 158–70.
Mok, Diana. “Do Two-Earner Households Base Their Choice of Residential Location
       on Both Incomes?” Urban Studies 44, no. 4 (2007): 723–50.
Mokhtarian, Patricia L., and Ilan Salomon. “How Derived Is the Demand for Travel?:
       Some Conceptual and Measurement Considerations.” Transportation Research
       Part A 35, no. 8 (2001): 695–719.
Mokhtarian, Patricia L., and Ilan Salomon. “Travel for the Fun of It.” Access 15 (1999):
       26–31.
                                                            BIBLIOGRAPHY          211


Mokhtarian, Patricia L., Ilan Salomon, and Lothlorien S. Redmond. “Understanding
       the Demand for Travel: It’s Not Purely ‘Derived.’” Innovation: The European
       Journal of Social Science Research 14, no. 4 (2001): 355–80.
Monschein, Andrew, and Brian D. Taylor. “Is Traffic Congestion Overrated?: Exam-
       ining the Highly Variable Effects of Congestion on Travel and Accessibility.”
       Journal of Transport Geography 64 (2017): 65–76.
Moore, George Edward. Principia Ethica. Edited by Thomas Baldwin. Cambridge:
       Cambridge University Press, 1993.
Moore, José, Karen Lucas, and John Bates. Social Disadvantage and Transport in the
       UK: A Trip-Based Approach. Oxford: Transport Studies Unit, University of
       Oxford, 2013.
Morlok, Edward K. Introduction to Transportation Engineering and Planning. New
       York: McGraw-Hill, 1978.
Morris, Jennifer M., Peter L. Dumble, and Marcus R. Wigan. “Accessibility Indica-
       tors for Transport Planning.” Transportation Research Part A 13, no. 2 (1979):
       91–109.
Murray, Alan T., and Rex Davis. “Equity in Regional Service Provision.” Journal of
       Regional Science 41, no. 4 (2001): 577–600.
Naess, Petter. “‘New Urbanism’ or Metropolitan-Level Centralization?: A Comparison
       of the Influences of Metropolitan-Level and Neighborhood-Level Urban Form
       Characteristics on Travel Behavior.” Journal of Transport and Land Use 4, no. 1
       (2011): 25–44.
National Cooperative Highway Research Program. Default Values for Highway Capac-
       ity and Level of Service Analyses. NCHRP Report 599. Washington DC: National
       Cooperative Highway Research Program, 2008.
National Research Council. Key Transportation Indicators: Summary of a Workshop.
       Edited by Janet Norwood and Jamie Casey, Committee on National Statistics,
       Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC:
       National Academy Press, 2002. https://www.nap.edu/read/10404/chapter/420.
National Transit Database. NTD Annual Database. https://www.transit.dot.gov/ntd/
       ntd-data.
Nelles, Jen. “Regionalism Redux: Exploring the Impact of Federal Grants on Mass
       Public Transit Governance and Political Capacity in Metropolitan Detroit.”
       Urban Affairs Review 49, no. 2 (March 1, 2013): 220–53.
Nelson, Arthur C. Planner’s Estimating Guide. Washington DC: American Planning
       Association Planners Press, 2004.
Nelson, Arthur C., and Joanna Ganning. National Study of BRT Development Outcomes.
       National Institute for Transportation and Communities Final Report NITC-
       RR-650. Portland, OR: National Institute for Transportation and Communities,
       2015. http://ppms.trec.pdx.edu/media/project_files/NITC-RR-650_ELXlH8p.pdf.
Nussbaum, Martha C. “Capabilities as Fundamental Entitlements: Sen and Social
       Justice.” Feminist Economics 9, nos. 2–3 (2003): 33–59.
Nussbaum, Martha C. Women and Human Development: The Capabilities Approach.
       Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
O’Toole, Randal. Gridlock: Why We’re Stuck in Traffic and What to Do About It. Wash-
       ington, DC: Cato Institute, 2010.
Overgaard, Knud R. Traffic Estimation in Urban Transportation Planning. Copenhagen:
       Danish Academy of Technical Sciences, 1966.
Owen, Andrew, and David M. Levinson. Access Across America: Transit 2014 Data.
       Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Digital Conservancy, 2014. http://dx.doi.
       org/10.13020/D6MW2Q.
212         BIBLIOGRAPHY


Owen, Andrew, and David M. Levinson. “Modeling the Commute Mode Share of
       Transit Using Continuous Accessibility to Jobs.” Transportation Research Part A
       74 (2015): 110–22.
Owen, Andrew, Brendan Murphy, and David Levinson. Access Across America: Auto
       2015. Report CTS 16-07. Minneapolis: Accessibility Observatory, Center
       for Transportation Studies, Department of Civil, Environmental, and Geo-
       Engineering, University of Minnesota, 2016. http://access.umn.edu/research/
       america/auto/2015/.
Owen, Andrew, Brendan Murphy, and David Levinson. Access Across America: Transit
       2015. Report CTS 16-09. Minneapolis: Accessibility Observatory, Center for
       Transportation Studies, University of Minnesota, 2016.
Papa, Enrica, and António Ferreira. “‘Moving to Access’ in Transport Planning: Identi-
       fying Barriers, Designing Strategies.” Presented at AESOP Congress, Lisbon, July
       2017. http://westminsterresearch.wmin.ac.uk/19955/1/AESOP%20Enrica%20
       Papa%20Antonio%20Ferreira.pdf.
Papa, Enrica, Cecilia Silva, Marco Te Brömmelstroet, and Angela Hull. “Accessibility
       Instruments for Planning Practice: A Review of European Experiences.” Journal
       of Transport and Land Use 3, no. 3 (2015): 1–20.
Paulssen, Marcel, Dirk Temme, Akshay Vij, and Joan L. Walker. “Values, Attitudes and
       Travel Behavior: A Hierarchical Latent Variable Mixed Logit Model of Travel
       Mode Choice.” Transportation 41, no. 4 (2014): 873–88.
Pelham, Thomas G. “Transportation Concurrency, Mobility Fees, and Urban Sprawl in
       Florida.” Urban Lawyer 42, no. 4 (2010): 105.
Pendall, Rolf. “Do Land Use Controls Cause Sprawl?” Environment and Planning B 26
       (1999): 555–71.
Pendall, Rolf. “Local Land Use Regulation and the Chain of Exclusion.” Journal of the
       American Planning Association 66, no. 2 (2000): 125–42.
Pérez, Patricio E., Francisco J. Martínez, and Juan de Dios Ortúzar. “Microeconomic
       Formulation and Estimation of a Residential Location Choice Model: Impli-
       cations for the Value of Time.” Journal of Regional Science 43, no. 4 (2003):
       771–89.
Polzin, Steven E., Ram M. Pendyala, and Sachin Navari. “Development of Time-of-
       Day–Based Transit Accessibility Analysis Tool.” Transportation Research Record:
       Journal of the Transportation Research Board, no. 1799 (2002): 35–41.
Prashker, Joseph, Yoram Shiftan, and Pazit Hershkovitch-Sarusi. “Residential Choice
       Location, Gender and the Commute Trip to Work in Tel Aviv.” Journal of Trans-
       port Geography 16, no. 5 (2008): 332–41.
Preston, John, and Fiona Rajé. “Accessibility, Mobility and Transport-Related Social
       Exclusion.” Journal of Transport Geography 15, no. 3 (2007): 151–60.
Preston, Valerie, and Sara McLafferty. “Spatial Mismatch Research in the 1990s: Prog-
       ress and Potential.” Papers in Regional Science 78 (1999): 387–402.
Proffitt, David G., Keith Bartholomew, Reid Ewing, and Harvey J. Miller. “Accessibility
       Planning in American Metropolitan Areas: Are We There Yet?” Urban Studies 15
       (2017): 1–26.
Pucher, John, and John L. Renne. “Socioeconomics of Urban Travel: Evidence from the
       2001 NHTS.” Transportation Quarterly 57, no. 3 (2003): 49–77.
Puget Sound Regional Council. Transportation 2040 Plan. Seattle, WA: Puget Sound
       Regional Council, 2010.
Purvis, Charles. “Data and Analysis Methods for Metropolitan-Level Environmental
       Justice Assessment.” Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transporta-
       tion Research Board, no. 1756 (2001): 15–21.
                                                               BIBLIOGRAPHY           213


Redmond, Lothlorien S., and Patricia L. Mokhtarian. “The Positive Utility of the Com-
       mute: Modeling Ideal Commute Time and Relative Desired Commute Amount.”
       Transportation 28, no. 2 (2001): 179–205.
Rodrigue, Jean-Paul, Claude Comtois, and Brian Slack. The Geography of Transport
       Systems, New York: Routledge, 2009.
Rollison, Tamara, and Brian Coy. “Gov. McAuliffe Announces Virginia’s First Priori-
       tization Process Scores Nearly 300 Proposed Transportation Projects.” Virginia
       Department of Transportation, January 19, 2016. http://www.virginiadot.org/
       newsroom/statewide/2016/gov._mcauliffe_announces_virginias91759.asp.
Roskie, Jamie Baker, and Janna Blasingame Custer. “Adequate Public Facilities Ordi-
       nances: A Comparison of Their Use in Georgia and North Carolina.” Southeast-
       ern Environmental Law Journal 15 (2006): 345–94.
Salomon, Ilan, and Patricia L. Mokhtarian. “What Happens When Mobility-Inclined
       Market Segments Face Accessibility-Enhancing Policies?” Transportation
       Research Part D 3, no. 3 (1998): 129–40.
Samuelson, Paul A. “The Pure Theory of Public Expenditure.” Review of Economics and
       Statistics 36, no. 4 (1954): 387–89.
San Antonio–Bexar County Metropolitan Planning Organization. Mobility 2040. San
       Antonio, TX, 2015.
San Francisco Planning Department. “San Francisco Bicycle Plan Environmental
       Impact Report.” Vol. 1, V.A. 1-1 and V.A. 2-6. 2009.
Sanchez, Thomas W., and Marc Brenman. The Right to Transportation: Moving to
       Equity. Chicago: American Planning Association, 2007.
Sanchez, Thomas W., Qing Shen, and Zhong-Ren Peng. “Transit Mobility, Jobs Access
       and Low-Income Labour Participation in US Metropolitan Areas.” Urban Stud-
       ies 41, no. 7 (2004): 1313–31.
Sanchez, Thomas W., Rich Stolz, and Jacinta S. Ma. Moving to Equity: Addressing
       Inequitable Effects of Transportation Policies on Minorities. Cambridge, MA: Civil
       Rights Project at Harvard University, 2003.
Schachter, Jason. Geographical Mobility: March 1999 to March 2000. Current Popula-
       tion Reports P20-538. Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau, 2001.
Scherer, Milena. “Is Light Rail More Attractive to Users Than Bus Transit?: Arguments
       Based on Cognition and Rational Choice.” Transportation Research Record, no. 2144
       (2010): 11–19.
Schirmer, Patrick M., Michael A. B. van Eggermond, and Kay W. Axhausen. “The Role
       of Location in Residential Location Choice Models: A Review of Literature.”
       Journal of Transport and Land Use 7, no. 2 (2014): 3–21.
Schrank, David, Bill Eisele, Tim Lomax, and Jim Bak. 2015 Urban Mobility Scorecard.
       College Station: Texas Transportation Institute, Texas A&M University, 2015.
Schrank, David, and Tim Lomax. The 2007 Urban Mobility Report. College Station:
       Texas Transportation Institute, Texas A&M University, 2007.
Schrank, David, and Tim Lomax. 2009 Urban Mobility Report. College Station: Texas
       Transportation Institute, Texas A&M University, 2009.
Schroeder, Bastian J., Christopher M. Cunningham, Daniel J. Findley, Joseph E. Hum-
       mer, and Robert S. Foyle. Manual of Transportation Engineering Studies. 2nd ed.
       Washington DC: Institute of Transportation Engineers, 2010.
Schweitzer, Lisa, and Abel Valenzuela Jr. “Environmental Injustice and Transportation: The
       Claims and the Evidence.” Journal of Planning Literature 18, no. 4 (2004): 383–98.
Scott, Darren, and Mark Horner. “Examining the Role of Urban Form in Shaping
       People’s Accessibility to Opportunities: An Exploratory Spatial Data Analysis.”
       Journal of Transport and Land Use 1, no. 2 (2008): 89–119.
214         BIBLIOGRAPHY


Sen, Amartya. “The Concept of Development.” In Handbook of Development Econom-
       ics, edited by Hollis Chenery and Thirukodikaval N. Srinivasen, 9–26. London:
       Elsevier, 1988.
Sen, Amartya. Development as Freedom. New York: Knopf, 1999.
Sen, Amartya. Inequality Reexamined. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1992.
Sen, Amartya. “Well-Being, Agency and Freedom: The Dewey Lectures 1984.” Journal
       of Philosophy 82, no. 4 (1985): 169–221.
Shared-Use Mobility Center. Shared-Use Mobility Reference Guide. Chicago: Shared-
       Use Mobility Center, 2015. http://sharedusemobilitycenter.org/wp-content/
       uploads/2015/09/SharedUseMobility_ReferenceGuide_09.25.2015.pdf.
Shen, Qing. “Location Characteristics of Inner-City Neighborhoods and Employment
       Accessibility of Low-Wage Workers.” Environment and Planning B 25, no. 3
       (1998): 345–65.
Social Exclusion Unit. Making the Connections: Final Report on Transport and Social
       Exclusion. London: Office of the Deputy Prime Minister, 2003.
Southeast Michigan Council of Governments. 2030 Regional Transportation Plan for
       Southeast Michigan. Detroit: Southeast Michigan Council of Governments,
       2004. http://s3.amazonaws.com/zanran_storage/library.semcog.org/Content
       Pages/2455560602.pdf.
Squires, Gregory D., and Charis E. Kubrin. “Privileged Places: Race, Uneven Develop-
       ment and the Geography of Opportunity in Urban America.” Urban Studies 42,
       no. 1 (2005): 47–68.
Srour, Issam, Kara M. Kockelman, and Travis P. Dunn. “Accessibility Indices: Con-
       nection to Residential Land Prices and Location Choices.” Transportation
       Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, no. 1805 (2002):
       25–34.
Staley, Sam, and Adrian T. Moore. Mobility First: A New Vision for Transportation in a
       Globally Competitive Twenty-First Century. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield,
       2009.
Steinberg, Michael W. “Making Sense of Environmental Justice.” Forum for Applied
       Research and Public Policy 15, no. 3 (2000): 82–89.
Stevens, Mark R. “‘Does Compact Development Make People Drive Less?’: The Answer
       Is Yes.” Journal of the American Planning Association 83, no. 1 (2016): 7–18.
Stewart, John Q. “Demographic Gravitation: Evidence and Applications.” Sociometry
       11, no. 1 (1948): 31–58.
Stokenberga, Aiga. “Does Bus Rapid Transit Influence Urban Land Development and
       Property Values: A Review of the Literature.” Transport Reviews 34, no. 3 (2014):
       276–96.
Stopher, Peter R., and Arnim H. Meyburg. Urban Transportation Modeling and Plan-
       ning. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1975.
Sundquist, Eric. “Virginia DOT’s SMART Scale Project Prioritization Process.” Paper
       presented at the Transportation Research Board 96th Annual Meeting, Washing-
       ton, DC, January 8–12, 2017.
Taylor, Brian D., and Paul M. Ong. “Spatial Mismatch or Automobile Mismatch?: An
       Examination of Race, Residence, and Commuting in U.S. Metropolitan Areas.”
       Urban Studies 32, no. 9 (1995): 1537–57.
Taylor, Brian D., and Alexandra Tassiello Norton. “Paying for Transportation: What’s a
       Fair Price?” Journal of Planning Literature 24, no. 1 (2009): 22–36.
Te Brömmelstroet, Marco, and Luca Bertolini. “Integrating Land Use and Transport
       Knowledge in Strategy-Making.” Transportation 37, no. 1 (2010): 85–104.
                                                            BIBLIOGRAPHY         215


Thomas, Trevor, Andrew Mondschein, Taner Osman, and Brian D. Taylor. “Not So
      Fast?: Examining Neighborhood-Level Effects of Traffic Congestion on Job
      Access. Transportation Research Part A 113 (2018): 529–41.
Thorsen, Inge, and Jens P. Gitlesen. “A Simulation Approach to Studying the Sensitiv-
      ity of Commuting-Flow Predictions with Respect to Specific Changes in Spatial
      Structure.” Environment and Planning A 34, no. 2 (2002): 271–88.
Tomer, Adie, Elizabeth Kneebone, Robert Puentes, and Alan Berube. Missed Oppor-
      tunity: Transit and Jobs in Metropolitan America. Washington, DC: Brookings
      Institution, 2011.
Townsend, Peter. Poverty in the United Kingdom: A Survey of Household Resources and
      Standards of Living. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1979.
Transit Cooperative Research Program. Civil Rights Implications of the Allocation of
      Funds between Bus and Rail. Legal Research Digest 27. Washington, DC: Trans-
      portation Research Board, 2008.
Transit Cooperative Research Program. Transit Capacity and Quality of Service
      Manual. 2nd ed. Washington, DC: Transportation Research Board, 2003.
Transit Cooperative Research Program. Transit Capacity and Quality of Service
      Manual. 3rd ed. Washington, DC: Transportation Research Board, 2013.
“Transportation Concurrency.” Chap. 12.24 of the City of Snoqualmie (Washington)
      Municipal Code. http://www.codepublishing.com/WA/Snoqualmie/.
Transportation Research Board. Driving and the Built Environment: The Effects of
      Compact Development on Motorized Travel, Energy Use, and CO2 Emissions.
      Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2009.
Transportation Research Board. Expanding Metropolitan Highways: Implications for
      Air Quality and Energy Use. Special Report 245. Washington, DC: National
      Academies Press, 1995.
Transportation Research Board. Highway Capacity Manual. Washington, DC: National
      Academies Press, 1994.
Transportation Research Board. Highway Capacity Manual 2010. http://hcm.trb.
      org/?qr=1.
Transportation Research Board. Highway Capacity Manual: A Guide for Multimodal
      Mobility Analysis. 6th ed. Washington, DC: Transportation Research Board,
      2016.
Transportation Research Board. Travel Estimation Techniques for Urban Planning.
      NCHRP Report 365. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 1998.
Tumlin, Jeffrey. Sustainable Transportation Planning: Tools for Creating Vibrant,
      Healthy, and Resilient Communities. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2012.
Turner, Christopher G. “A Model Framework for Transportation and Community
      Plan Analysis.” Journal of the American Planning Association 38, no. 5 (1972):
      325–31.
United States Census Bureau. American Community Survey. U.S. Census Bureau’s
      American Community Survey Office, 2006–2010.
United States Census Bureau. 2013 American Community Survey. U.S. Census Bureau’s
      American Community Survey Office. http://factfinder2.census.gov.
United States Census Bureau. LODES Data. Longitudinal-Employer Household
      Dynamics Program, 2015. http://lehd.ces.census.gov/data/lodes/.
United States Code of Federal Regulations. Title 23, Highways. 2006.
United States Department of Labor. Economic News Release: Employee Tenure Sum-
      mary. Washington, DC: Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2010. http://www.bls.gov.
      proxy.lib.umich.edu/news.release/tenure.nr0.htm.
216         BIBLIOGRAPHY


United States Department of Transportation. Highway Statistics 2002. Washington,
      DC: Bureau of Highway Statistics, 2002.
United States Department of Transportation. 2001 National Household Travel Survey.
      Washington, DC: Federal Highway Administration and Bureau of Transporta-
      tion Statistics, 2003.
United States Department of Transportation. 2009 National Household Travel Survey.
      Washington, DC: Federal Highway Administration, 2011.
United States General Accounting Office. Bus Rapid Transit Shows Promise. Washing-
      ton DC: U.S. General Accounting Office, 2001.
van Wee, Bert. “Evaluating the Impact of Land Use on Travel Behavior: The Environ-
      ment versus Accessibility.” Journal of Transport Geography 19, no. 6 (2011):
      1530–33.
van Wee, Bert, and Karst T. Geurs. “Discussing Equity and Social Exclusion in Acces-
      sibility Evaluations.” European Journal of Transport and Infrastructure Research
      11, no. 4 (2011): 350–67.
van Wee, Bert, and Karst T. Geurs. “The Role of Accessibility in Urban and Transport
      Planning.” In Handbook on Transport and Urban Planning in the Developed
      World, edited by Michiel C. J. Bleimer, Corinne Mulley, and Claudine J. Moutou,
      53–66. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2016.
Vega, Amaya, and Aisling Reynolds-Feighan. “A Methodological Framework for the
      Study of Residential Location and Travel-to-Work Mode Choice under Central
      and Suburban Employment Destination Patterns.” Transportation Research Part A
      43, no. 4 (2009): 401–19.
Virginia Department of Transportation. Smart Scale Technical Guide. Richmond: Vir-
      ginia Department of Transportation, 2016.
Wachs, Martin. “Learning from Los Angeles: Transport, Urban Form, and Air Quality.”
      Transportation 20, no. 4 (1993): 329–54.
Wachs, Martin, and T. Gordon Kumagai. “Physical Accessibility as a Social Indicator.”
      Socio-Economic Planning Sciences 7, no. 5 (1973): 437–56.
Wachs, Martin, and Brian D. Taylor. “Can Transportation Strategies Help Meet the
      Welfare Challenge?” Journal of the American Planning Association 64, no. 1
      (1998): 15–19.
Waddell, Paul, Chandra Bhat, Naveen Eluru, Liming Wang, and Ram Pendyala.
      “Modeling Interdependence in Household Residence and Workplace Choices.”
      Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board,
      no. 2003 (2007): 84–92.
Walker, Jarrett. Human Transit: How Clearer Thinking about Public Transit Can Enrich
      Our Communities and Our Lives. Washington, DC: Island Press, 2012.
Walton, William. “Linking New Development to Traffic Generation: The Deficiencies
      of the Current Methodology of Traffic Impact Analysis.” Town Planning Review
      69, no. 4 (1998): 375–96.
Weiner, Edward. Urban Transportation Planning in the United States: A Historic Over-
      view. Westport, CT: Praeger, 1999.
Widener, Michael J., Steven Farber, Tijs Neutens, and Mark W. Horner. “Using Urban
      Commuting Data to Calculate a Spatiotemporal Accessibility Measure for Food
      Environment Studies.” Health & Place, no. 21 (2013): 1–9.
Wilson, Alan G. “A Family of Spatial Interaction Models, and Associated Develop-
      ments.” Environment and Planning A 3, no. 1 (1971): 1–32.
Wilson and Company. “Interchange Access Change Request.” Unpublished memo. Wilson
      and Company, 2013.
                                                             BIBLIOGRAPHY          217


Wyly, Elvin K., and Daniel J. Hammel. “Gentrification, Segregation, and Discrimination
      in the American Urban System.” Environment and Planning A 36, no. 7 (2004):
      1215–41.
Zhang, Ming. “Bus versus Rail: Meta-Analysis of Cost Characteristics, Carrying
      Capacities, and Land Use Impacts.” Transportation Research Record: Journal of
      the Transportation Research Board, no. 2110 (2009): 87–95.
Zondag, Barry, and Marits Pieters. “Influence of Accessibility on Residential Location
      Choice.” Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research
      Board, no. 1902 (2005): 63–70.
Index




The letter f following a page number indicates a figure; t indicates a table.

accessibility distribution, 16, 51–53, 74–78, 96,      Baltimore, Maryland, 117–118, 118t
     106–109, 116–123, 132–134                         Banister, David, 27, 125
accessibility elasticity, 57–62, 159–161               Bicycling. See active transportation
accessibility evaluation                               Blumenberg, Evelyn, 110
  of land-development projects, 57–62                  Bonavia, Michael, 19–22, 25
  marginal effects, 47, 55, 58, 69                     Boulder, Colorado, 72
  vs. mobility evaluation, 61–62, 68–69                build vs. no-build scenarios, 56, 63–69, 63f,
  of nonwork travel, 126–131                                106, 144–145
  public transport, 51–53                              bus rapid transit (BRT), 91, 93, 98
  of social equity, 101, 106–122                       bus versus rail, 87, 97–99
  of transportation projects, 62–69
accessibility maps, 51–53, 66–67                       California
accessibility measurement, 11–14, 48–53,                 California Environmental Quality Act,
     87–90                                                  31–32, 147
accessibility measurement components                     CalTrans, 42
  destinations, 48–49                                    SB 743, 31
  impedance, 49                                        Camden County, Missouri, 144–146
  modes, 49–50                                         carless populations, 111, 113–114, 117, 119,
  origins, 48                                               123
  time of day, 49–50                                   Cervero, Robert, 40, 42, 93
  travel cost, 49                                      Chicago, Illinois, 131f, 150–151
accessibility shift, 1–7, 11–17                        Civil Rights Act of 1964, 104–105
  derived-demand rationale, 3–7                        Clinton administration (Executive Order
  obstacles to, 11–16, 45–46, 148–151                       12898: Federal Actions to Address
active transportation, 5, 31–32, 40, 54, 86, 89,            Environmental Justice in Minority
     147–148                                                Populations and Low-Income
adequate public facilities ordinances, 12                   Populations), 104
African Americans, 116, 119–122                        Columbus, Ohio (Mid-Ohio Regional
Alamo Area. See San Antonio, Texas                          Planning Commission), 106
Alamo Area Metropolitan Planning                       comprehensive vs. partial accessibility,
     Organization, 64                                       14–15
Asian Americans, 119–122                               concurrency requirements, 12, 142–143
Albuquerque, New Mexico, 144–145                       congestion
Ann Arbor, Michigan, 48, 58–61, 69                       density and, 71
Arlington County, Virginia, 90                           measures of, 11, 31, 54
Australia, 103                                           mitigation as a policy goal, 1–5, 7, 27–29,
auto accessibility, 15, 16, 32, 52, 54                      137, 141–142, 144–147, 152–154
  evaluation of, 59–61, 65–68, 159–161                   non-auto, 40
  interregional comparisons of, 73, 75–85,               primacy of measures of, 11, 39, 149
     164–165                                             problems with measures of, 102,
  to nonwork destinations, 130–131                          106
  vs. public transport accessibility, 88–89,             relationship to accessibility, 7, 15, 32–33,
     107–110                                                33t, 73, 77, 83, 85


                                                                                        219
220            INDEX


congestion (continued)                                nonequivalence with accessibility, 16–17
  relationship to development approval, 43,           as a planning goal, 100–108, 122–123,
     47, 72, 154                                         157
  See also traffic impact analysis                  Executive Order 12898: Federal Actions
cost-benefit analysis, 4, 97–98, 144                     to Address Environmental Justice in
Cournot, Augustin, 18                                    Minority Populations and Low-Income
Crane, Randall, 22                                       Populations, 104
cumulative opportunity, 50–51, 54, 74, 80,
     116                                            fallacies about accessibility
                                                       accessibility as urbanism, 39–43, 139
density                                                travel-cost minimization, 12, 22–25, 34
   and accessibility, 13, 79–85                     Federal Aid Highway Acts, 104, 141
   high-density areas, 108                          Federal Highway Administration, 144
   low-density areas, 8, 68, 71, 73, 76, 122,       Federal Transit Administration, 104–105
      139                                           Fit Index, 93, 95
   and public-transport accessibility, 93–97,       fixed guideway transit, 93, 98–99
      99                                            forecasts
   regulation’s effect on, 32, 44, 72, 99–100,         necessary for accessibility evaluation,
      146, 154, 163f, 164f                                55–56, 60, 62–70, 160–161
   See also land-use regulations; proximity            of roadway congestion, 141, 145
derived demand, 3–7                                    of travel demand in relation to land use, 4,
   challenges to, 11–16                                   19–20
destinations                                           See also traffic impact analysis
   vs. access to the transport system, 38, 90–91,   frequency of public transport, 87–88, 90, 100,
      105, 149–150                                        105
   density and, 80, 97
   land use and, 57, 102                            General Transit Feed Specification, 89
   measurement of, 48–50, 79, 126–130, 159          Gini Index, 93, 95t, 96, 132–134, 133f
   nonwork, 124–125, 132–134                        Golub, Aaron, 107
   as the object of travel, 1–8, 15, 19–28          Gordon, Peter, 125
   value of, 9–10                                   gravity, 50–51, 59–60, 65, 74, 79, 129,
   zones for, 49                                         159–160
Detroit, Michigan, 42, 109–110, 110f, 115,
      131f                                          Haig, Robert M., 11, 35–37
development review, 47, 61–62, 146, 148             Hansen, Walter, 11, 36, 39
disaggregate analysis, 30, 49, 54, 69               headways. See frequency of public transport
Dumble, Peter L., 38                                high-income people, 31, 117–118
                                                    Highway Capacity Manual, 12, 141, 143,
elements of accessibility. See accessibility             155
      measurement components                        Houseman, Gerald L., 6
employment accessibility. See work                  Houston, Texas, 76, 77f, 131f
      accessibility                                 Hurd, Richard M., 35–36
environmental impact report, 147–148
environmental justice, 104–108                      impedance, 49–50, 59, 61t, 65, 74, 129,
   Executive Order 12898, 104                             159–160
equity                                              income
   accessibility distribution and, 51–54, 52f,        accessibility as a predictor of, 35–36
      53f                                             See also equity; low-income people;
   difference across groups, 111–113,                     high-income people
      116–122                                       induced development, 41, 56, 62–63, 68–69,
   gap between public transport and auto                  137
      accessibility, 109–116                        Institute of Transportation Engineers, 12, 141,
   horizontal vs. vertical, 107                           142, 155
                                                                              INDEX            221


instrumental vs inherent view of accessibility,    Ma, Kang-Rae, 125
     5–6, 13, 29–34, 137                           Manville, Michael, 110
integrated transport/land-use models, 63           Marshall, Alfred, 18–22
intermetropolitan comparison, 52, 73–78,           Martens, Karel, 107
     81–85                                         metropolitan planning organizations, 42, 63,
                                                       78, 104–106, 142, 152
Jain, Juliet, 25                                    See also names of individual organizations
job accessibility. See work accessibility          Mid-America Regional Council, 105
job-housing balance, 126                           Mid-Ohio Regional Planning Commission,
                                                       106
Kansas City, Missouri, 83, 105, 113, 145           Mid-Region Council of Governments,
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 72                             144–145
Kumagai, T. Gordon, 7, 22, 38, 106                 Mitchell, Robert B., 19–22
Kumar, Ajay, 125                                   mobility
                                                    component of accessibility, 7–9, 39–41,
land-use model, 63, 64–65, 145                         66–68, 76, 80–83, 138–139, 163f
land-use patterns                                   confusion with accessibility, 7, 42–45, 91,
   decentralization of, 102, 117                       149–150
   effect on accessibility, 73, 92, 95, 139         constituencies for, 153–154
   forecasts of, 64, 66, 66f, 67f                   deficiencies as a policy goal, 38, 99,
   impact on vehicle kilometers traveled,              101–103, 105, 122, 137, 141
      139                                           defined, 1–4
   as an input to travel demand models, 4,          derived demand, 19–21, 27–28
      19–20                                         effect of dense development on, 72, 74–78,
   transportation investment’s impact on, 63,          80–84
      117                                           evaluation, 14, 62, 66–69, 85, 91, 102–103,
   See also density; urban form                        148
land-use planning. See development review;          measurement, 11–12, 39, 54–56, 65,
      land-use regulations; regional-scenario          105–106, 144, 149
      planning; zoning                              mobility-inclined populations, 22
land-use regulations                                paradigm, 17, 71, 90, 101, 136–138,
   accessibility-based guidance of, 14, 35, 46,        141–148, 153–156
      84–85                                         policy goal, 1–2, 4, 7, 26, 31, 136
   impact of mobility analysis on, 3, 43,           tools, 44, 57, 61, 69 (see also traffic-impact
      72–73                                            analysis)
   impact on equity of, 115                         See also accessibility evaluation: vs. mobility
   and nonwork accessibility, 133                      evaluation
   rationales for, 37                              Mobility 2040 Plan, 64, 66–69, 66f, 67f,
   See also zoning                                     67t
Las Vegas, Nevada, 83                              mode-choice modeling, 24, 37
level of service, 12, 14, 15, 31, 44,              Mode-Location Match Ratio, 113–116,
      141–145                                          114f
Levinson, David M., 83                             mode of travel, 2, 49, 101–102, 109, 116
light rail transit (LRT), 92, 97–99                Mokhtarian, Patricia L., 6, 21, 22, 29
Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics           Morris, Jennifer M., 38
      data (LEHD), 93                              Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st
Loop 1604, 68–69                                       Century Act (MAP-21), 142
Los Angeles, California, 51–53, 52f, 53f, 77–78,   Murphy, Brendan, 83
      115, 120–122, 130–131
low-income people, 31–34, 91, 96, 102,             National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA),
      104–105, 117, 118                                 104
Lucas, Karen, 103                                  National Household Travel Survey, 128,
Lyons, Glen, 25                                         168–171
222           INDEX


National Transit Database (NTD), 93               public transport
NEPA (National Environmental Policy Act),           accessibility impacts of bus versus rail,
     104                                               91–99
Netherlands, 103                                    mobility-accessibility confusion, 104–106
New Mexico Department of Transportation,            networks, 89
     144                                            passenger volumes, 91, 94
Newsom, Gavin, 147                                  proximity effects of, 86
New York City, New York, 71, 77–78, 83, 115,        ridership, 91, 94
     119–122, 119f, 130, 131f                       service access versus accessibility, 90–91
non-fixed-guideway transit, 93                      spatial and temporal variation, 87–89, 99
nonmotorized transportation. See active             stations, 51, 86, 88, 89, 91, 105
     transportation                                 stops, 89, 90, 105
nonwork accessibility                               technical challenges for accessibility
  defined, 49                                          evaluation, 87–90
  differences from work accessibility, 36, 49,      transfers, 87, 88, 90, 91
     124–125                                        travel mode (see mode of travel)
  index of, 79, 126–130                             travel time, 87–89
  influence on residential location, 132–134
  intermetropolitan comparison of,                race, 102, 111, 116, 119–122
     130–132                                        African Americans, 116, 119–122
  and mixed-use neighborhoods, 40                   Asian Americans, 119–122
  as a policy goal, 125–126, 134, 168–171         Rapkin, Chester, 19–22
North American Industry Classification            regional-scenario planning, 13–14, 53–55,
     System, 79, 128, 168–171                           150–151
                                                  regression models, 79, 83, 93–95, 164–165
origins, 25, 48, 57                               Richardson, Harry W., 125
  and public transport accessibility, 89, 91      Robinson, Glenn, 107
O’Toole, Randal, 29                               Rodrigue, Jean-Paul, 7
Owen, Andrew, 83
                                                  Salomon, Ilan, 6, 21, 22, 29
pedestrianism, 39–43, 139                         San Antonio, Texas, 48, 64–68, 66f, 67f, 67t,
person-based accessibility, 14, 127                     69
place-based accessibility, 14–15, 48, 79,         San Francisco, California, 23, 75–76, 75f,
      116–117                                           146–148, 155
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 76, 77f               service access, 90
planning conflicts, 71–72                         Snoqualmie, Washington, 191
Pocatello, Idaho, 142                             social exclusion, 103–104
positive vs. normative accessibility, 13, 35–39   Social Exclusion Unit, United Kingdom,
Prince George, British Columbia, Canada, 72             103–104
project-level accessibility                       Southeast Michigan Council of Governments,
   conceptual foundations of, 55–56                     59, 159
   for land-use projects, 57–62                   space-time accessibility, 14, 127
   for transportation projects, 62–68             speed
proximity                                            of bus vs. rail, 95, 98
   as a component of accessibility, 3–4, 7–8,        of nonmotorized modes, 89
      26–28, 45–47, 97, 140, 164f                    See also congestion; mobility
   confusion with accessibility, 32–34, 39–43,    Stewart, John Q., 35–37, 39
      138, 145                                    St. Louis, Missouri, 131f, 145
   interaction with speeds, 74–78, 83, 85         Stoke-on-Trent, United Kingdom, 72
   land use changes that promote, 32, 47,
      71–72, 80, 86, 95, 139                      TELUM, 64–65
   people’s value of, 25                          TIGER grant (Transportation Investment
   reductions to, 41, 102, 137                         Generating Economic Recovery), 144
   to public transport, 105                       time of day, 49, 59, 61t, 87, 159
public goods, 19                                     See also public transport
                                                                               INDEX            223


traffic analysis zone (TAZ), 59, 159–160              as an input to accessibility measurement,
traffic calming, 155                                     49–50, 59–61, 65, 79, 130, 159–161,
traffic-impact analysis                                  164
   accessibility-based substitutes for, 57–63,        as a mobility measurement, 54, 67t, 68, 69,
      69, 159–161                                        149, 150, 153
   as a constraint on land development, 12,           for public transport, 87–89
      44, 146                                         to work, 23
   as a form of mobility evaluation, 14, 47, 56       See also congestion; mobility; travel costs
transit accessibility, 79                          travel-time budget, 27
   challenges in measurement of, 15, 87–90         Tumlin, Jeffrey, 39, 42
   compared with auto accessibility, 15, 108
   effect of public investment on, 97–100          United Kingdom, 72, 103–104
   geographic distribution of, 51, 52, 53f, 109,   University of Minnesota Accessibility
      110f                                               Observatory, 92, 93
   influence of bus vs. rail on, 91–97             urban form
   as measured by the mode-location match             impact on travel behavior of, 29–30
      ratio, 113–116                                  influence on accessibility, 8, 71–73, 78–85,
   misconceptions about, 90–91                           92, 122–123
   and social equity, 106–113, 116–122                slow change of, 138
   See also public transport                          sustainability of, 27, 139
Transit Capacity and Quality of Service               See also density; land-use patterns
      Manual, 90                                   urbanism, 39–43, 139
transit-dependent people, 106, 108, 110–117,       utility-based measures, 50–51
      123
transit-oriented development, 31, 40, 79,          vehicle-kilometers traveled (VKT) reduction,
      95, 99                                            5, 6, 28, 30–34, 126, 136–140, 157
transit-rich areas, 109, 111–115, 123              vehicle-revenue miles, 92, 98
transportation equity. See equity                  Virginia
transportation improvement plan, 145                 Arlington County, 90
Transportation Investment Generating                 Department of Transportation, 152
      Economic Recovery (TIGER grant), 144           House Bill 2, 152
Transportation/land-use integration, 6, 46, 47,      System Management and Allocation of
      97, 140–141, 151                                  Resources for Transportation (SMART),
travel costs                                            152–153
   of automobile ownership, 117
   as an incomplete measure of accessibility,      Wachs, Martin, 7, 22, 38, 106
      33, 38                                       Wake County, North Carolina, 143
   and derived demand, 22, 25, 27, 34              Walker, Jarrett, 86, 87
   fallacy of minimization of, 12, 19, 21–24       Washington, DC, 75–76, 109–110, 115
   induced demand as a result of reduced, 32       Wigan, Marcus R., 38
   as an input to accessibility measurement,       work accessibility, 15
      49                                             calculation of, 65
   investment resulting in reduction of, 62          intermetropolitan comparison of, 73
   measures of, 50, 65                               maps of, 51, 53f
   relative indifference to, 122                     public transit and, 92–97
   varying responses to, 73 (see also                relation to density, 79–85
      impedance)                                     See also accessibility distribution
   See also travel time
travel-demand modeling, 12, 65, 78, 142, 145       zone, 48–49, 59–60, 64–65, 113, 116–117,
travel time                                             130
   as a component of accessibility, 29, 62           traffic analysis zone (TAZ), 59, 159–60
   differences among population groups, 103        zoning, 5, 37, 62, 72, 100, 119, 146
