[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: book/T05-myrdal-1957-economic-theory-and-under-developed-regions-no-doi.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Title:           Economic Theory and Under-Developed Regions
Keywords:        https://archive.org/details/economictheoryun0000gunn_s9c9
Author:          Gunnar Myrdal
Creator:         Internet Archive (Scribe Version 5.3-initial-170-ga5e5737d)
Producer:        Internet Archive PDF 1.4.16; including mupdf and pymupdf/skimage
CreationDate:    Thu Dec  1 06:57:54 2022 WIB
ModDate:         Thu Dec  1 06:57:54 2022 WIB
Custom Metadata: yes
Metadata Stream: yes
Tagged:          yes
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            none
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           200
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       330.4 x 565.6 pts
Page rot:        0
File size:       9805356 bytes
Optimized:       no
PDF version:     1.5
[Extracted Text]
       a     soar



     Y PAPERBACKS



Economic
Theory and
Underdeveloped
Regions
GUNNAR MYRDAL
             Digitized by the Internet Archive
                 in 2022 with funding from
                  Kahle/Austin Foundation




https://archive.org/details/economictheoryun0000gunn_s9c9
                                       Augsburg College
                                    George Sver
                                           win ben
                                                 at

                                         nee tN       ha We




  ECONOMIC  THEORY AND
UNDER-DEVELOPED   REGIONS
Dr. Myrdal’s classic work points out that
economic inequalities between nations are
increasing; and he argues that this is bound
to happen when the free play of market
forces is allowed to continue unchecked.
    “Around the central argument there
cluster loosely a number of disquisitions on
value judgments in economics, on colonial-
ism, on the criteria of national planning, and
on international trade. All are stimulating,
all are valuable . . . a good book.”
                                 The Economist
        UNIVERSITY     PAPERBACKS
                    uP66
  Economic ‘Theory and
Under- Developed Regions

      GUNNAR              MYRDAL
   formerly Lars Hierta Professor of Political
       Economy and Public Finance at the
             University of Stockholm




  UNIVERSITY             PAPERBACKS

          METHUEN        - LONDON
First published by Gerald Duckworth 1957
    Reprinted 1957, 1958, 1959 and 1964
          © by Gunnar Myrdal 1957
      First published in this series 1963
                Reprinted 1964
   Printed and bound in Great Britain by
      Jarrold and Sons Ltd, Norwich
         Catalogue No 02/6816/46
                    ia

For copyright reasons this book may not be
 issued to the public on loan or otherwise
       except in its original soft cover
 A cloth bound, library edition is available
          from Gerald Duckworth




  University Paperbacks are published by
       METHUEN & CO LTD
    11 New Fetter Lane, London E.C.4
                           Preface
In October 1955, at the invitation of the National Bank of Egypt.
I gave the Anniversary Commemoration Lectures in Cairo. The
lectures were later published by the Bank under the title: Develop-
ment and Under-development: A Note on the Mechanism of National
and International Economic Inequality (Cairo, 1956). I am grateful
to the Bank for doing me the honour of inviting me as guest
lecturer, for publishing my lectures, and for now permitting me
to reissue them in a revised version.
   In preparing the text for the present volume I have made the
revision as thorough as I could without increasing too much the
length of the manuscript. From the original lectures I have
permitted myself to preserve, however, both the non-technical
treatment of problems and the informal and sometimes personal
manner of expression.
   About the contents I can be brief. I take it for granted that the
rapid growth of writings on the economic problems of under-
developed countries reflects the fundamental change in the inter-
national political situation since the Second World War. In select-
ing as topic for my lectures the subject I have mentioned, I was
aware that I was merely following in the general stream of this
adjustment of the social sciences to the new political situation in
the world.
   The complex of problems facing under-developed countries
can, however, be viewed from many angles: different questions
can be asked and different approaches chosen. It is, indeed, in the
interest of a balanced growth of scientific knowledge that many
individual students should simultaneously tackle problems in
many different ways. In the great humanistic tradition of rational-
ism, our faith is that in the field of social sciences, as in other
fields of endeavour, progress will come as the result of discussion
and even of controversy.
   I have here chosen to focus attention on one particular aspect
                                 Vv




107245
                              Preface
of the international situation, namely the very large and steadily
increasing economic inequalities between developed and under-
developed countries. Though these inequalities and their tendency
to grow are flagrant realities, and though they form a basic cause
of the international tension in our present world, they are usually
not treated as a central problem in the literature on under-develop-
ment and development.
   This is, however, precisely what I want to do. My purpose is to
inquire why and how these inequalities came to exist, why they
persist, and why they tend to increase. In Chapter 7 I shall also
touch on another question: how could these trends be reversed?
A rational answer to this last question—which concerns policy
and where the reasoning proceeds in terms of means and ends
rather than causes and effects—will have to be based upon know-
ledge of the causal mechanism by which the inequalities came to
exist.
   Part II on Economic Inequalities, the Public Conscience and
Economic Theory, corresponds to the first lecture in the series as
originally delivered. In its present form this part of the text was
written to serve as a critical introduction to the book. When
finally preparing the manuscript for printing, I decided, however,
to transfer these chapters to their present position. The reader
who is not particularly interested in the philosophical basis, and
the inherited predilections, of our thinking on economic problems
should, I felt, have the right to get immediately to the substance of
what positively I have to say on the main question I have raised.
   I felt also that some readers who will not agree with my opinions
in the critical part may better tackle the positive part of the argu-
ment if their feelings have not been hurt in advance by having
read the critical part. Indeed, I felt a hope that the content of the
positive part might even bring them to a better understanding of
why I have so consistently preserved a critical attitude to certain
elements in our inherited economic theory.
   But independently of the order of presenting the thoughts, this
remains an economist’s book on his attitude to economic theory.
As this attitude of the author dates back to his earliest scientific
                                Vi
                              Preface
endeavours, the reader will have to excuse references back to his
writings. The argument moves on a general and methodological
plane in the sense that the theory is discussed as a complex of broad
structures of thought. I bring in specific facts only when necessary
for stating problems, or as checks on the applicability of theory
in explaining reality; and figures are left out altogether.
   The value premises which determine my viewpoint are the
desirability of political democracy and of equality of opportunity.
For an explanation of the great importance which I attach to the
principle of working with explicit value premises, and for a more
precise definition of those actually used in these lectures, I refer
the reader to my book, An International Economy (Routledge,
London, 1956)—in particular to the Preface, Chapter II, the
Appendix—and to those of my earlier publications cited in
footnote 1 to that Appendix.
   Though the argument is presented in a general form, my pur-
pose is to help to make theory more realistic. In the larger book I
just mentioned, and to which these lectures are complementary, I
have attempted a more detailed and concrete treatment of the
problems of economic under-development and development, but
I have there referred only in passing to the present issue of the
mechanism of equality and inequality.
    The exposition refers exclusively to the non-Soviet world. In
the Soviet orbit a different economic system is in force: within the
single countries there is not only central state planning but also
public ownership of the means of production; international econo-
mic relations are determined by state monopoly.
    I do not want to exaggerate the relevance for economic analysis
of this distinction between the two economic systems. I believe
that the principle of circular and cumulative causation would have
its application in the Soviet world, too, in explaining development
trends as well as in determining policy. And I would personally
be greatly interested in pursuing my study into the realm of Soviet
economy.
    Moreover, I hold that there is no rational ground for assuming
 as immutable the sharp division of the world economy into “‘the
                                  Vii
                              Preface
two parallel world markets” which Stalin proclaimed, and which
he was so largely responsible for having created, implying among
other things a remarkable lack of diversification of state policy
within the Soviet orbit. World development during the last half-
century should have made us aware that nothing is permanent—
particularly not the political development in various countries,
and their arrangement in different camps according to ideologies—
and that the only certainty is that we shall continuously be sur-
prised by seeing the unexpected happen.
   But as a practical device, and in order to keep the line of reason-
ing simple and clear in this brief presentation, which is so much in
the nature of an abstract outline, I have preferred to restrict my
range of vision to the non-Soviet world.
                                                             G. M.
Geneva, August 14, 1956.




                                Vili
                       Contents
  Preface                                                 ae

                             Part I
THE MECHANISM OF NATIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL
            ECONOMIC INEQUALITY

                          CHAPTER     I
       AN UNEXPLAINED GENERAL               TRAIT    OF
                SOCIAL REALITY
  International Economic Inequalities                      3
  Increasing Awareness                                     7
  The Inadequacy of the Inherited Theoretical Approach     8

                            CHAPTER 2
          THE PRINCIPLE OF CIRCULAR AND
                 CUMULATIVE CAUSATION
  The Vague Notion of the Vicious Circle                  II
  Stable Equilibrium a False Analogy                      12
  An Illustration: the Negro Problem in America           13
  Circular Causation                                      16
  The Scientific Problem                                  17
  Argumentum ad Hominem                                   20

                          CHAPTER 3
   THE      DRIFT TOWARDS      REGIONAL ECONOMIC
              INEQUALITIES     IN A COUNTRY
  A Simple Illustration                                   23
  The Play of the Market Forces Works towards In-
    equality                                              26
  Migration, Capital Movement and Trade: the “Back-
    wash Effects”                                         27
  The ‘“Non-economic Factors”                             29
  The “Spread Effects”’                                   31
  Two Broad Correlations                                  33
  Examples of Other Counteracting Changes                 35
  Changes in General Business Conditions                  EW
                              ix
                        Contents
                        CHAPTER    4
              THE ROLE OF THE STATE
                                                        page
Egalitarian State Policies in the Richer Countries
The “‘Oppressor State”
The Long History of Policies for Economic Develop-
   ment of Under-developed Regions
A “Created Harmony”
The Price System
                          CHAPTER 5
           INTERNATIONAL INEQUALITIES
Assumptions for the Analysis
The Effects of Trade, Capital Movements and Migration
The Weak Spread Effects
The Economic Impact of Colonialism
The Play of the Forces
The Colonial System under Liquidation
The Heritage from Colonialism
The Absence of a World State

                        CHAPTER 6
             NATIONAL STATE POLICIES
         IN UNDER-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
Rising Nationalism
Growth of Solidarity between the Under-privileged
   Nations
The Rich and the Poor Countries Moving Apart
The Powers of the Poor
A Moral Element
Relevance of the Soviet Orbit

                         CHAPTER 7
       NATIONAL ECONOMIC PLANNING IN
           UNDER-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
Agreement on the Necessity of a State Plan
Major Problems of State Planning
An Induced and Controlled Cumulative Process
Planning Must Be Done in Real Terms
The Price System Does Not Give Rational Criteria for
  Economic Planning
Not a Gospel of Licence
International Trade under National Economic Planning
Special Needs for Protection
Again No Invitation to Licence
                             xX
                         Contents
                          CHAPTER 8
                      A CHALLENGE                        page
 The Under-developed Countries’ Need of Research           98
 The Need for New Approaches in Economic Theory            99
 The Role of the Young Economists in Under-developed
   Countries                                              IOI


                          Part II
             ECONOMIC INEQUALITIES,
THE PUBLIC   CONSCIENCE AND ECONOMIC                   THEORY


                        CHAPTER 9
       THE     EQUALITY DOCTRINE AND           THE
                     ESCAPE FROM IT
 The Radical Tenets of Western Civilisation              107
 An Ideological Force                                    III
 The Belief in Innate Differences                        112
 Escapism in Economic Theory                             114
 The Significance of Malthus                             116
 The Reasons for Compromise                              118
 The Dynamics of Equalisation                            120
 Other Competing Valuations                              122
 The Convenience of Ignorance                            123
 A New Phase in the Struggle for Equality                125
 Equalisation Upwards                                    126
 Fact-finding in the Social Sciences                     127
 The Traditionalism of Theory                            129
 The “Realism of Conservatism”                           131


                        CHAPTER     10
      THE CONSERVATIVE PREDILECTIONS OF
 ECONOMIC THEORY AND THEIR FOUNDATION
              IN THE BASIC PHILOSOPHIES
 Antidotes to the Equality Doctrine     135
 Harmony of Interests                   136
 Laissez-faire                          138
 The Free Trade Doctrine                140
 The Equilibrium Concept                142
 A Blind Spot                           144
                             x1
                        Contents
                        CHAPTER   II
A NOTE ON THE 'THEORY OF INTERNATIONAL
  TRADE AND THE INEQUALITY PROBLEM
                                                      page
Factor Price Equalisation                              147
The Inadequacy of the Theory to Explain the Facts      149
Unrealistic Assumptions                                151
Effects on the Discussion of Under-development and
   Development                                         154
The Front against Iconoclasm                           156

                        CHAPTER   12
        THE   LOGICAL   CRUX      OF ALL   SCIENCE
The Relation between the Moral and the Intellectual
  Discords                                             159
The Logical Necessity of a Theory and the Need of
  Adjusting it to Facts                               160
The Provenance of Truthful Theory                     161
The Crux of all Science                               163

Index                                                  165




                            Xli
             PART?

The Mechanism of National and
International Economic Inequality
     mee’
Paar a inisan
         aan   m4
                                 CHAPTER       I


        AN    UNEXPLAINED GENERAL                            TRAIT
                  OF SOCIAL REALITY

International Economic Inequalities
    The facts of international economic inequalities in the present
world, when viewed in the very broadest perspective, fall into a
definite and simple pattern.
   A few countries are highly developed economically and have
very high levels of average real income per head. Richest of all are
the former British colonies which are located in the temperate
zones and which became populated mainly by European stock,
i.e. the United States and Canada, Australia and New Zealand.
The countries in North-Western and West-Central Europe also
belong to this group. Together the inhabitants of these few coun-
tries make up about one-sixth of the total population in the
non-Soviet world.
    This is the economic upper class of nations in world society.
The lower class of nations is far bigger: more than two-thirds of
the people in the non-Soviet world live in countries where real
income per head is only a tiny fraction of what it is in the highly
developed countries and, indeed, in most cases is much smaller
than it was in those countries before they started to develop
rapidly a century or more ago.”
    To this majority group of very poor nations belong all the
peoples of Africa, except the white settlers in South Africa,
entrenched behind their Apartheid legislation, and similar,
though smaller, enclaves of white people in other parts of that
continent which is still largely carved up into colonial possessions
   1 For verification of the broad survey of international economic inequalities
in this section, I refer to the latest publications of the United Nations and the
Secretariats of the three regional Economic Commissions.
   2 Cf. also Simon Kuznets, ‘“‘Under-developed Countries and the Pre-industrial
Phase in the Advanced Countries: An Attempt at Comparison’’.        Paper to the
World Population Conference, Rome, 1954, to be published.
                                        3
        Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
  of West-European powers. The whole of non-Soviet Asia, includ-
  ing the countries in the Middle and Near East, belongs to this
  group of very poor countries. Finally, it includes the larger part
  of Latin America, which has, however, a few countries which have
  reached a ‘‘middle-class”’ position, like Argentine or Uruguay.
     In the highly developed countries all indices point steadily
  upwards. On the average and in the longer span there are no signs
_ of a slackening of the momentum of economic development in
  those countries. Looking backwards, business slumps and big
  depressions and even severe setbacks due to war, appear only as
  short-term waverings of the firmly rising long-term trend. In
  the period after the Second World War these countries have seen
  their labour and other productive resources constantly in work at
  full capacity. The general expectancy in these countries of a
  continued rapid economic development is part of the commonly
  shared assumptions on the basis of which national life evolves
  towards ever higher realisation of democracy and national in-
  tegration.
     It is on the whole the industrialised countries which are
  industrialising further. By far the greater portion of the non-Soviet
  world’s total savings originates in this smaller part of it where
  incomes are high. As new inventions are constantly raising the
  demand for capital, almost all of the available capital is invested
  there. If one counted as home investment also the expenditure on
  building up the closely controlled enclaves for exploiting oil and
  mineral resources in the poorer countries, this would appear to be
  the case even more completely.
    In the under-developed     countries, on the other hand, where
 incomes are so very much lower, capital formation and investment
 tend generally to be smaller, even relatively to their lower incomes.
 For equality in rate of development, they should instead be
 relatively bigger, since in the poorer countries the natural popula-
 tion increase is usually faster. The faster population increase is a
 result of a particular relation between fertility and mortality rates,
 where both are on a very high level, which, in addition, tends to
 make the age distribution of their populations relatively less
                                   4
                An Unexplained General Trait
 advantageous. As a consequence of all this—and of the tradition
 of stagnation which has entrenched itself in their entire culture—
 their economic development usually proceeds more slowly. Many
 of these countries have during recent decades even moved back-
 wards in average income.
    Levels of income per head differ greatly amongst these very
 poor countries. In South and East Asia the differences are quite
 big even between neighbouring countries, and the same is true in
 the other major regions where under-developed countries are
 found.
    And everywhere in the under-developed part of the world there
are countries or regions of countries which are experiencing rapid
economic development. Even in Africa there are areas with fever-
ish investment and mounting production, always connected with
outside economic exploitation of their natural resources.
    In the Middle East the general poverty is so great that the
Palestine refugees, herded together in pitiful quarters in camps—
which they themselves prevent from being improved in order not
to prejudice their claims to return to Palestine—and mainly sup-
ported on the United Nations’ grant of annually about $40 per
head, are estimated to enjoy a higher standard of living than broad
masses of poor Arabs in the surrounding countries, and sometimes
higher than they themselves once enjoyed in Palestine before their
eviction.
   But in the Eastern part of the region the oil-producing countries
—or rather their rulers—draw royalties and other oil revenues
which are said now to amount to one billion dollars a year; in ten
years’ time they are expected to increase to three billion dollars a
year. On the Mediterranean coast the tiny Israel, not endowed
very bountifully by nature, and under constant threat of being
overwhelmed by the rising flood of the hostile Arab nations
surrounding it, but being financially supported by the world Jewry,
is developing very rapidly under great stress and strain. In
Lebanon, Beirut is an old and rich trading centre.
   In Latin America many countries, even besides those cited
above as having reached a middle-class position, have experienced
                                 5
       Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
considerable economic development in recent decades, though it
has been unstable in time and uneven. On the whole it has been
limited to the ports and cities, and has left the rural masses in
stagnation and destitution.
   The great differences between countries within both groups in
actual economic levels, as well as in current development rates and
development rates during different periods in the near past, do not
invalidate the following broad generalisations:
   (i) that there are a small group of countries which are quite well
off and a much larger group of extremely poor countries;
   (ii) that the countries in the former group are on the whole
firmly settled in a pattern of continuing economic development,
while in the latter group average progress is slower, as many
countries are in constant danger of not being able to lift themselves
out of stagnation or even of losing ground so far as average income
levels are concerned; and
   (iii) that, therefore, on the whole, in recent decades the economic
inequalities between developed and under-developed           countries
have been increasing.
   This trend towards international economic inequality stands out
in contrast to what is happening within the rich countries in-
dividually. ‘There the trend has, in recent generations, been
towards greater equality of opportunity, and this development has
been an accelerating one which is still gaining momentum. The
contrary development for the world as a whole should be related
also to the fact that as yet there has been no real parallel within
the poorer countries individually to the equalisation process now
going on in the rich countries. Most of the poorer countries have
preserved as great internal inequalities between individuals, classes
and regions as there have ever been; in many of them the inequali-
ties are still growing.
   In the highly developed countries there has been spectacular
progress, of which we who live there are acutely conscious. The
poorer, under-developed countries, which on the average are
developing more slowly, form, however, much the larger part of
                                  6
                     An Unexplained General Trait
 the world; again on the average, the population growth has been
 more rapid there than in the small group of rich countries. With
 these two facts in mind, it becomes very uncertain whether and in
 what sense it can be held that there has in recent decades been any
 economic progress at all for mankind as a whole.

  Increasing Awareness
     Other facts basic to our problem are political ones:
     (i) the peoples in the under-developed countries are becoming
  increasingly aware of these huge international inequalities and the
  danger that they will continue to grow; and
=    (ii) these peoples and their spokesmen show an inclination to put
| part of the blame for their poverty on the rest of the world and, in
  particular, on the countries which are better off—or, rather, they
  attribute the inequalities to the world economic system which keeps
  them so poor while other nations are so rich and becoming richer.
    The Second World War helped to release many checks and
 controls upholding the established power system in the world, and
 one of its results was the liberation on a vast scale of subject peoples
 from colonial rule. An important characteristic of the new
 nationalism which was born in this process is, however, that the
 demand of the peoples is for equality of opportunity with other
 peoples, as well as for liberty. All these very poor nations, as they
 are touched by the Great Awakening, crave economic develop-
 ment as well as national independence.
    It is interesting that we have nowall come to refer to this majority
 of very poor countries as “the under-developed countries’. ‘This
 dynamicterm, which has gained its present prevalence only after the
 Second World War, itself indicates the great change in the world
 political situation to which I have referred. The expression com-
 monly used until quite recently was the static term “‘the backward
 countries’.
    Both terms—like all the fundamental concepts of the social
 sciences—are value-loaded, and it is conducive to clarity in our
   1 This is not meant in a critical sense; see An International Economy, Appendix.
 “Methodological Note on the Concepts and the Value Premises”, op. cit., pp.
 336ff., and earlier writings cited in footnote 1 to the Appendix, p. 365.
                                         7
       Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
thinking that we are aware of this fact. The use of the concept,
“the under-developed countries”, implies the value judgment that
it is an accepted goal of public policy that the countries so desig-
nated should experience economic development. It is with this
implication that people in the poorer countries use the term and
press its usage upon people in the richer countries. When they, in
their turn, accept this term and suppress the old one “the back-
ward countries”, they also accept the implication.
   The change from the static to the dynamic concept thus implies
in the richer countries a registration of a positive attitude to the
Great Awakening in the poorer countries and, therefore, an
acknowledgement—given, naturally, only in a general and there-
fore necessarily vague form—that those countries are right in
demanding higher standards of income, a bigger share in the good
things of life and greater equality of opportunity.
   As part of the same intellectual realignment, the broad facts of
international economic inequalities, referred to above, have begun
to be disseminated ever more widely, not only in the under-
developed countries, where they furnish part of the driving force
in the political process I refer to as the Great Awakening, but also
in the developed ones.
   It can be seen that when ordinary people in our developed
countries are for the first time made aware of these stern facts, this
experience often has the character of a revelation to them; it can
also be observed that the new knowledge is felt to be awkward.
Their general concept of the world, as it is and as it ought to be,
cannot easily be adjusted to a realisation of all this abject poverty
in most of the world, and of the tendency for international
inequalities to grow.
   The discussion of the reaction of the public conscience to the facts
of economic inequalities is pursued further in Part II of this book.

The Inadequacy of the Inherited Theoretical Approach
   In Part II which, as I explained in the Preface, is nothing else
than a displaced introduction, I also discuss the apparent inade-
quacy of our inherited theoretical approach to come to grips with
                                  8
                An Unexplained General Trait
the problem of economic inequalities. More specifically, I point
out that a study, however intensive, of the theory of international
trade cannot provide much of an explanation in causal terms of
how the facts of international economic inequalities have come
into existence, and why there is a tendency for the inequalities to
grow. The theory of international trade and, indeed, economic
theory generally were never worked out to serve the purpose of
explaining the reality of economic under-development and
development.
   To understand why economic theory has developed in this way
requires an immanent criticism of its inherited predilections. This
is attempted in Part IJ. On the more superficial level of mere
logic, the explanation is the unrealistic assumptions for theory.
   Stable equilibrium is one such unrealistic assumption. In its
uncomplicated form it implies the notions that every disturbance
provokes a reaction within the system, directed towards restoring
a new state of equilibrium, and that action and reaction will meet
in one and the same time-space. An economic system which is not
in rest is for this reason always moving towards equilibrium,
though not necessarily the straight way. It is usually also conceded
that every new primary change, and in addition the fact that
continuously the system is not resting in equilibrium, will change
the virtual equilibrium position towards which it is moving.
Implied in the stable equilibrium notion and preserved even in its
most relativistic forms is the idea that, when a change calls forth
other changes as reaction, these secondary changes are counter-
directed to the primary change.
   To the credit of this assumption can be counted that it repre-
sents an easily available theoretical means to comprehend and
demonstrate in a simple manner the universal inter-dependence
between all the factors in the economic system. It constitutes also
an almost indispensable logical step in many economic arguments.
   In our tradition the stable equilibrium assumption has become
something of a general thought-form: indeed, the essence of the
approach which is associated with the idea of a single and central
economic theory. Few economists, even among those who have
                                 9
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
criticised the notion of stable equilibrium, altogether escape its
influence on their thinking. As I point out in Chapter Io, it is
imbued with a teleological intent, and is related to powerful
predilections, all rooted firmly in the traditions of economic theory
from its early origin and in the philosophies which were, and
continuously are, this theory’s logical basis.
   The notion that there are certain elements of social reality which
can be characterised as ‘‘the economic factors’, and that a theo-
retical analysis can be rationally restricted to the inter-actions of
those factors, constitutes another unrealistic assumption. It is
closely related to the equilibrium assumption. For it is precisely
in the realm of that large part of social reality, which is left outside
the economic analysis by the abstraction from “‘the non-economic
factors”, that the equilibrium assumption falls to the ground.
Those non-economic factors cannot be taken for given and static;
when they react, they normally do so in a disequilibrating way.
   In reality there is, of course, no distinction between facts
corresponding to our traditional scholastic division of social
science into separate disciplines. A realistic analysis of problems
can never stop at such lines of division. The distinction between
factors that are ‘“economic”’ and those that are “‘non-economic’’ is,
indeed, a useless and nonsensical device from the point of view of
logic, and should be replaced by a distinction between “‘relevant”’
and “‘irrelevant” factors, or “‘more relevant” and ‘“‘less relevant’.
And this latter dividing line should not be expected to be the same
for different problems.
  The international inequalities are, of course, not dissimilar from
the regional inequalities within a country. We will also find that
there is a very close causal inter-relation between the two. For
these reasons I shall devote two chapters—Chapters 3 and 4—to
the regional inequalities within a country.




                                  i
                                  fe)
                                CHAPTER      2


         THE    PRINCIPLE OF CIRCULAR AND
                CUMULATIVE CAUSATION

The Vague Notion of the Vicious Circle
   Almost all students of problems connected with under-develop-
ment and development will be found, in one connection or another,
to have made a reference to the “‘vicious circle”. Professor C. E. A.
Winslow,    for instance, in a book devoted to the economics               of
health, points out:!
      It was clear . . . that poverty and disease formed a vicious
   circle. Men and women were sick because they were poor; they
   became poorer because they were sick, and sicker because they
   were poorer.
Winslow thus points to a circular and cumulative process, con-
tinuously pressing levels downwards, in which one negative factor
is, at the same time, both cause and effect of other negative factors.
   In the same spirit, Professor Ragnar Nurkse, when giving the
1952 Commemoration Lectures in Cairo, referred to the ‘‘vicious
circle of poverty” and explained:?
     The concept implies, of course, a circular constellation of
  forces tending to act and react upon one another in such a way
  as to keep a poor country in a state of poverty. Particular in-
  stances of such circular constellations are not difficult to imagine.
  For example, a poor man may not have enough to eat; being
  under-nourished, his health may be weak; being physically
  weak, his working capacity may be low, which means that he is
  poor, which in turn means that he will not have enough to eat;
  and so on. A situation of this sort, applying to a country as a
  whole, can be summed up in the trite proposition: “a country is
  poor because it is poor’.
   1 C.E. A. Winslow, The Cost of Sickness and the Price of Health, Monograph
Series, No. 7, Geneva, 1951, p. 9; also Gunnar Myrdal, “Economic Aspects of
Health”, Chron. World Health Organisation, Geneva, 1952, 6, No. 7-8.
   2 Ragnar Nurkse, Some Aspects of Capital Accumulation in Under-developed
Countries, Cairo, 1952; cf. Ragnar Nurkse, Problems of Capital Formation in
Under-developed Countries, Oxford, 1953, pp. 4f.
                                     TI
        Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
Quite obviously a circular relationship between less poverty, more
food, improved health and higher working capacity would sustain
a cumulative process upwards instead of downwards.
   The whole American folklore built around the tendency for
people to want to jump on the bandwagon is centred around a
conception of an upward spiral. So is, of course, also the expres-
sion in America which is so typical of their optimistic go-getting
culture: ‘‘nothing succeeds like success”.          'To this, which is by
itself so eminently true, must be added, in order to preserve the
balance, a reminder of the truth also of the traditional idea of the
“vicious circle’? downwards: nothing fails like failure.
   As so often is the case, the Bible gives a perfect expression of
this ancient folk wisdom:
      For unto every one that hath shall be given, and he shall have
   abundance: but from him that hath not shall be taken away even
   that which he hath.?
In this admirable statement the truth is seen that the cumulative
process goes in both directions. And there is voiced also an under-
standing of the fact, which in our analysis will be given much
importance, namely that the cumulative process, if not regulated,
will cause increasing inequalities.

Stable Equilibrium a False Analogy
   In this book I shall attempt to give a more definite formulation
to this vague idea of the circular causation of a cumulative process.
It is my conviction that this idea contains im muce the approach to a
more realistic analysis of social change—indeed a vision of the
general theory of under-development and development which we
are all yearning for.
   Expressed first in negative terms, my starting point is the
assertion that the notion of stable equilibrium is normally a false
analogy to choose when constructing a theory to explain the
changes in a social system. What is wrong with the stable equili-
brium assumption as applied to social reality is the very idea that a
  ist. Matthew, xxv: 29; cf. xiii: 12. Cf. the folksy American expression:
“Thems as has gits.”” A peasant in Southern Portugal was heard saying: “Those
who have something here, get everything, but those who have not anything,
get nothing.”
                                     12
              Circular and Cumulative Causation
social process follows a direction—though it might move towards
it in a circuitous way—towards a position which in some sense or
other can be described as a state of equilibrium between forces.
Behind this idea is another and still more basic assumption,
namely that a change will regularly call forth a reaction in the
system in the form of changes which on the whole go in the
opposite direction to the first change.
   The idea I want to expound in this book is that, on the contrary,
in the normal case there is no such tendency towards automatic
self-stabilisation in the social system. The system is by itself not
moving towards any sort of balance between forces, but is con-
stantly on the move away from such a situation. In the normal
case a change does not call forth countervailing changes but, in-
stead, supporting changes, which move the system in the same
direction as the first change but much further. Because of such
circular causation a social process tends to become cumulative and
often to gather speed at an accelerating rate.
   A social process can, of course, be stopped. One possibility is
that new exogenous changes may occur which have the direction and
the strength necessary to bring the system to rest. The position of
balancing forces which thus becomes established is, however, not
a natural outcome of the play of the forces within the system. The
position is, furthermore, unstable. Any new exogenous change
will by the reactions in the system again start a cumulative process
away from this position in the direction of the new change.
   Alternatively, the position of rest may have been achieved by
policy interferences, planned and applied with the intention of
stopping the movement. This is, of course, the very opposite of a
natural tendency towards equilibrium, endogenous to the system.
   This general characterisation of a process of social change refers
to the normal case; I shall be discussing at the end of the next
chapter the exceptions where countervailing tendencies are at work.

An Illustration: the Negro Problem in America
  I once carried out a comprehensive study of the development
problem of one particular group of people: the Negro population
                                 13
       Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
in the United States.1 It was during this study that I first came to
realise the inadequacy of the equilibrium approach, and to under-
stand that the essence of a social problem is that it concerns a
complex of interlocking, circular and cumulative changes. I was
gradually moved to make this thought the main hypothesis of my
study. My purpose in now referring back briefly to this study is to
give greater concreteness to the circular mechanism in a cumulative
process of social change.
   The American Negro people are not confined to one single
geographic district where they are alone by themselves. But they
are nevertheless cut off from the rest of the American population,
and are bound together in a distinctly separate social group, with a
community of worries and a common destiny. This relative social
isolation is effected by the American version of the institution of
colour caste.
   Behind the colour line the Negro people live a life almost as
separate as if they were on an island with restricted communica-
tions with the mainland. They have developed an entire class
structure of their own. The caste disabilities reflect themselves
in the fact of a greater concentration of the Negro population in the
lower social strata, and also in lower levels of all economic and
social indices for comparable strata. The unity of interests and
aspirations in this social group is just as great as that existing in
any under-developed country or region.
   The relative status of the Negro people in America in the late
thirties and early forties, when I made my survey, had been rising
since the great national compromise in the 1870’s, after the Civil
War and Reconstruction, but not very rapidly and there had even
been some retreats.
   The prevailing views on the Negro problem among social
scientists were mostly framed in terms of static equilibrium and
laissez-fatre, and demonstrated rather faithfully the general tendency
towards social fatalism which is inherent in this approach. Mistrust
of the efficiency of ‘“‘interferences’’ with the social process—such as,

  1 An American Dilemma.   The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy, Harper’s,
New York, 1944.

                                     14
                 Circular and Cumulative Causation
for example, efforts towards educating the white people to broader
views, campaigns for giving Negroes legal redress through the
courts, and legislation, ‘“movements’’, and ‘“‘reforms’’—character-
ised the approach, and was felt to bear the mark of hardboiled scienti-
fic objectivity in contradistinction to the credulity of the do-gooders.}
The practical conclusion tended to be that the rise in Negro status
would continue to be, as it had been for generations, a very slow
and uncertain process, largely outside the grip of intentional
policy measures: “‘state-ways cannot change folk-ways’’.?
   In my study I reached the conclusion that the national com-
promise which had reigned for such a long time was approaching
its end. ‘“Ten years from now this (past) period in the history of
inter-racial relations in America may come to look as a temporary
interregnum. The compromise was not a stable power equili-
brium.”* More positively, my conclusion was that ‘“‘not since
Reconstruction has there been more reason to anticipate funda-
mental changes in American race relations, changes which will
involve a development toward the American ideals’’.* This great,
    1 Nevertheless, the social scientists of this period—though often asserting in
all good faith that their findings and teaching could not have any great practical
effect on the development of inter-racial relations in America—were all the time
efficiently bringing together and organising the rational arguments for a funda-
mental social change. Indeed, they were making it increasingly difficult for
educated white people to continue to hold some of the stereotyped opportunistic
views which were basic to segregation and discrimination. It is my conviction,
for which I have given the evidence in the book referred to above, that the work
of American social scientists during the pre-war period contributed mightily
towards producing the driving forces for the dynamic development of inter-
racial relations which began to gather increased momentum some ten years ago.
   2 This laissez-faire approach in the tradition of William Sumner—with still
older moorings in the natural law philosophy which, with all the enthusiasm for
fact-finding, has a particularly strong hold in America—was often connected
with a vague philosophy of economic determinism. In the pre-war period, it
presented itself in two versions with many intermediary positions: a radical
Marxist version, where the expectation was an economic revolution which would
change everything and even eradicate race prejudice; and, much more com-
monly, a conservative liberalistic version, according to which no such revolution
was to be expected and, consequently—as the assumption in that version too
was that no significant change can be brought about except by tackling the
“basic factor’, the economic system—the situation would remain pretty well
as it was and that, anyhow, there was not a great chance for the reformers to alter
much. The one-factor theory thus strengthened the equilibrium approach and
its inherent fatalistic tendency and stood in the way of a rational conception of
circular inter-dependence leading to cumulative dynamic development, implying
chances also for magnified effects of purposely induced changes.
  3 An American Dilemma, p. 1014.                 4 [bid., p. xix.
                                        15
       Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
dramatic break in the social development of American society has
since actually happened. A student who has sometimes been
wrong in his forecasts of the future will be excused for pointing to a
case when he was right.

Circular Causation
   I want now to sketch in its barest outlines the social theory or
methodological hypothesis that I used in this particular study.?
   In its simplest form the explanatory model can be reduced to two
factors: ‘‘white prejudice’, causing discrimination against the
Negroes in various respects, and the “low plane of living” of the
Negro population. These two factors are mutually inter-related:
the Negroes’ low plane of living is kept down by discrimination
from the whites while, on the other side, the Negroes’ poverty,
ignorance, superstition, slum dwellings, health deficiencies, dirty
appearance, bad odour, disorderly conduct, unstable family
relations and criminality stimulate and feed the antipathy of the
whites for Negroes.
   White prejudice and low Negro standards thus mutually
““cause”’ each other. If at a point of time things tend to remain
about as they are, this means that the two forces balance each
other: white prejudice and the consequent discrimination against
the Negroes block their efforts to raise their low plane of living; this,
on the other hand, forms part of the causation of the prejudice on
the side of the whites which leads them to discriminatory behaviour.
   Such a static ‘‘accommodation” is, however, entirely fortuitous
and by no means a stable equilibrium position. If either of the two
factors should change, this is bound to bring a change in the other
factor, too, and start a cumulative process of mutual interaction in
which the change in one factor would continuously be supported
by the reaction of the other factor and so on ina circular way. The
whole system would move in the direction of the primary change,
but much further. Even if the original push or pull were to cease
   1The rest of this section contains a condensation of the methodological
argument in the book cited and particularly Chapter 3, Section 7, “The Theory
of the Vicious Circle”, pp. 75 ff., and Appendix 3, “A Methodological Note on
the Principle of Cumulation”, pp. 1065 ff.
                                     16
              Circular and Cumulative Causation
after a time, both factors would be permanently changed, or the
process of interacting changes would even continue without any
neutralisation in sight.
   Both the two factors are composite entities. On the one hand,
the Negro’s plane of living is an amorphous concept definable only
in terms of a number of components—employment, wages, hous-
ing, nutrition, clothing, health, education, stability in family
relations, law observance, cleanliness, orderliness, trustworthiness,
loyalty to society at large, etcetera—which are all inter-related
in circular causation. A rise in any single one of the components
would tend to raise all the others and thus, indirectly as well as
directly, result in a cumulative decrease in white prejudice, with
new effects back on the Negro plane of living itself.
   The other factor, white prejudice, is an equally composite
entity, as “attitudes” always are: a combination of right and wrong
beliefs and heterogeneous valuations. And it is equally unstable.
For experience shows that if, by some chance, discrimination in a
particular field of social contact is increased or decreased, the
psychological force behind it, i.e. prejudice, tends to change so as
to support actual behaviour. This too fits into the general pattern
of circular causation.
   The point is not simply that “many forces are working in the
same direction”. They are, in fact, not doing so. In general there
are periods when opposing forces balance one another so that the
system remains in rest until a push or a pull is applied at one point
or another. When the whole system starts moving after such a
shock the changes in the forces work in the same direction, which
is something different. And this is so because the variables are so
interlocked in circular causation that a change in any one induces
the others to change in such a way that these secondary changes
support the first change, with similar tertiary effects upon the
variable first affected, and so on.

The Scientific Problem
  The circular causal inter-relation between all the factors in the
development of a population group like the American Negroes
                                  17
       Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
gives sense to the general notion of the “‘status” of the group—
in essentially the same way as the inter-relation between prices
gives sense to the notion of the “‘price level’’—and an index of this
status could be constructed, and would have meaning as measuring
in time or space the general tendency of the system. ‘The main
scientific task is, however, to analyse the causal inter-relations
within the system itself as it moves under the influence of outside
pushes and pulls and the momentum of its own internal processes.
   In a realistic study the system becomes, of course, very much
more complicated than any abstract model. In the case of the
Negro problem, for example, each of the elements of the main
factors in the situation—the low Negro plane of living and white
prejudice—needs to be studied intensively with reference to other
variables such as region, social class, age, sex, and so on. The
scientific ideal is not only to split the factors into their elements and
to arrange them in this way, but to give for each of the elements
quantitative measures of its ability to influence each of the others,
and to be influenced itself by changes in other elements within the
system or by changes in exogenous forces.
   The outside forces in the study in question are essentially the
whole surrounding national community. Some of these outside
forces, e.g. the business situation and employment opportunities,
are subject to violent short-term changes. Others are more con-
stant determinants, for instance the complex of inherited ideals
which I called “the American Creed” in my study, and the
institutional and political framework as it is influenced and
activated by those ideals. The outside forces push and pull the
system continuously, and at the same time change the structure of
forces within the system itself.
   The time element is of paramount importance, as the effects of a
shock on different variables of the system will be spread very
differently along the time axis. A rise in employment, for instance,
will almost immediately raise some levels of living; but a change in
levels of education or health is achieved more slowly, and its
effects on the other factors are delayed, so that there is a lag in the
 whole process of cumulation,
                                   18
               Circular and Cumulative Causation
   Ideally the scientific solution of a problem like the Negro
problem should thus be postulated in the form of an inter-
connected set of quantitative equations, describing the movement—
and the internal changes—of the system studied under the various
influences which are at work. That this complete, quantitative
and truly scientific formulation is far beyond the horizon does not
need to be pointed out; but in principle it could be made, and I
submit that the working out of such a complete and quantitative
solution should be the aim of our research endeavours even when
they have to stop far away from the ideal.
   If the realism of the hypothesis of circular causation is accepted,
certain general conclusions can be drawn which it is worth while
to spell out already at this point. To begin with, it is useless to
look for one predominant factor, a ‘‘basic factor’? such as the
“economic factor’’.t When studying the Negro problem or any
other social problem under this hypothesis it becomes, indeed,
difficult to perceive what precisely should be meant by the
“economic     factor’   as distinct    from   the others,    and   still less
understandable how it can be “basic’”’, as everything is cause to
everything else in an interlocking circular manner.
   For similar reasons, the application of this hypothesis moves
any realistic study of under-development and development in a
country, or a region of a country, far outside the boundaries of
traditional economic theory. This is because of necessity the study
becomes concerned also with all the so-called “non-economic
factors” which the classical economists lumped together in such
concepts as “‘the quality of the factors of production” and “the
efficiency of production” and usually kept outside their analysis.
   It is important to keep in mind that, if the hypothesis of cumu-
lative causation is justified, an upward movement of the entire
system can be effected by measures applied to one or the other of
several points in the system; but this certainly does not imply that
from a practical and political point of view it is a matter of
   1 We might in this connection note that there has been much unconscious
application of Marxian economic determinism, particularly in the American
sociological literature, sometimes of a kind that Marx and Engels would have
been tempted to characterise as “‘vulgar Marxism”’.
                                      19
       Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
indifference where and how a development problem is tackled.
The more we know about the way in which the different factors are
inter-related—what effects a primary change of each factor will
have on all the other factors, and when—the better we shall be able
to establish how to maximise the effects of a given policy effort
designed to move and change the social system.
   Nevertheless, it is unlikely that a rational policy will work by
changing only one factor. Thus, though this theoretical approach
is bound to suggest the impracticability, in the political sphere, of
all panaceas, it is, on the other hand, equally bound to encourage
the reformer. The principle of cumulation—insofar as it holds
true—promises final effects of very much greater magnitude than
the efforts and costs of the reforms themselves. The low status of
the Negro is, for instance, tremendously and self-perpetuatingly
wasteful all round—their low educational standard causes low
productivity, health deficiencies and low earnings, and these again
keep down the educational standards, and so on.
   The cumulatively magnified final effects of a push upward when
wisely applied to the relevant factors is, in one sense, a demon-
stration, and also a measure, of the earlier existing “‘social waste’’.
In the end, the cost of raising the status of the Negro will not
involve any “real net cost’ at all, but instead result in great
“social gains” for society. The definition of these political con-
cepts, based on explicit value premises, must be conceived of in the
dynamic terms of circular causation of a cumulative development.
   This is, indeed, the principle by which an under-developed
country can hope to “‘lift itself by its shoe strings” —if it can only
manage to accomplish what Professor W. W. Rostow calls the
“take-off into sustained growth” 1 and afford the sacrifice of waiting
for the full returns of its policy efforts.

Argumentum ad Hominem
  I started this chapter by referring to the floating, vague notion
of the “vicious circle” and by citing folklore and the Bible. I feel,
indeed, very much in line with ordinary common sense when I
  1W. W. Rostow, “The Take-off into Sustained Growth”, Economic Fournal,
1956, pp. 25-48.
                                  20
                Circular and Cumulative Causation
stress that in the normal case circular causation is a more adequate
hypothesis than stable equilibrium for the theoretical analysis of a
social process.
   John Maynard Keynes had some basis for his famous dictum
that usually “‘the practical men” are unknowingly “‘the slaves of
some defunct economist” when they express general opinions.
They then often think in the metaphysical terms of the doctrines
and predilections of economic theory. But in their own sphere of
activity they act on better assumptions.
   Every successful businessman has the principle of the cumula-
tive process as a built-in theory in his approach to practical pro-
blems; otherwise he would not be successful. A politician would
be a failure if he did not bring the cumulative effects into his cal-
culations. The whole philosophy of the professional philanthropists
is imbued with this hypothesis.!
   I go further and feel inclined to think that Keynes’ accusation
of traditionalism could be directed with even more justice against
the economists themselves, particularly since the duty would
clearly have been ours to liberate not only our own thinking but
also that of the general public.
   Practical men have been ahead of theory in monetary matters,
to choose a more specific case. It is a fact that the new and dynamic
approach, which was opened up by Knut Wicksell, followed by
many others—among them, of course, most prominently Keynes—
and which has reshaped such a large part of short-term economic
theory as well as economic policy, was totally original only to the
  1 Tn fact, the best formulation I have found of the working of the cumulative
process in the field of the Negro problem was given by one of the wisest heads
of foundations in America, the late Edwin R. Embree of the Rosenwald Fund:
‘There is a vicious circle in caste. At the outset, the despised group is usually
inferior in certain of the accepted standards of the controlling class. Being
inferior, members of the degraded caste are denied the privileges and opportuni-
ties of their fellows and so are pushed still further down and then are regarded
with that much less respect, and therefore are more vigorously denied advan-
tages, and so around and around the vicious circle. Even when the movement
starts to reverse itself—as it most certainly has in the case of the Negro—there
is a desperately long unwinding, as a slight increase in goodwill gives a little
greater chance, and this leads to a little higher accomplishment, and that to
increased respect, and so slowly upward toward equality of opportunity, of
regards, and of status.” (Brown America: the Story of a New Race, 'The Viking
Press, New York, 1931, p. 200.) The vaguely implied notion that circular
causation retards the speed of progress is, however, wrong.
                                       21
       Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
theoreticians with their usually unquestioning acceptance and
belief in J. B. Say’s law of the necessary equilibrium between total
demand and total supply.
  Laymen have, of course, never believed in that law; they have
always known that demand could fall short of, or exceed, supply,
and that in the former case business was booming while it was
falling off in the latter case. And Wicksell’s new approach only
spelled out in clearer terms vague ideas held by bankers, business-
men and political leaders upon the basis of which they had always
been acting—though on a more general plane, where they were
only talking and at most demonstrating their prejudices, they
usually felt happy to fall in with the false doctrines and predilections
of the theoreticians.




                                   2.2,
                            CHAPTER 3
      THE DRIFT TOWARDS                     REGIONAL
  ECONOMIC INEQUALITIES                     IN A COUNTRY

A Simple Illustration
   I have suggested that the principle of interlocking, circular
inter-dependence within a process of cumulative causation has
validity over the entire field of social relations. It should be the
main hypothesis when studying economic under-development and
development.
   Suppose that in a community an accidental change occurs which
is not immediately cancelled out in the stream of events: for
example, that a factory, where a large part of the population gets
its livelihood, burns down and that it becomes clear that it would
not pay to rebuild it, at least not in that locality. The immediate
effect of this primary change is that the firm owning it goes out of
business and its workers become unemployed. This will decrease
incomes and demand.
   In its turn the decreased demand will lower incomes and cause
unemployment in all sorts of other businesses in the community
which sold to, or served, the firm and its employees. A process of
circular causation has so been started with effects which cumulate
in the fashion of the “vicious circle’’.
   If there are no other exogenous changes, the community will be
less tempting for outside businesses and workers who had con-
templated moving in. As the process gathers momentum, busi-
nesses established in the community and workers living there
will increasingly find reasons for moving out in order to seek better
markets somewhere else. If they do, this will again decrease
incomes and demand. It will usually also change the age structure
of the local population in an unfavourable direction.
   To throw light on the mechanism of this cumulative causal
sequence, let us watch the behaviour of one single factor and let us
                                 23
       Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
choose one a little outside: the local tax rate. I shall assume that
local taxation is either, as in Scandinavia, levied directly on
incomes or, as in many other parts of the world, indirectly related
to them.   As the income basis narrows, the tax rate will have to be
raised.
   The higher tax rate, in its turn, will itself act as an extra incen-
tive for businesses and workers to leave the community, and as a
disincentive keeping out those who otherwise might have con-
sidered moving in. This then, in a second round, will again
decrease incomes and demand and, consequently, cause the tax
rate to move still further upwards, having much similar effects
again. Meanwhile the less favourable age distribution will have not
only contributed to lower taxable income per head, but also raised
the relative need for public welfare services.
   If in this situation the local authorities, because of the rising
tax rate, are moved to lower their standards in various public
services—such as the provision of schooling for children, homes
for the aged, roads, and the like—the rise of the tax rate may be
retarded but only at the expense of making the community less
attractive for businesses and workers in another important respect.
   Should the tax rate before the first change have reached a station-
ary level, it is now not moving towards this level as an equilibrium
—or any other stable level—but continuously away from the initial
state of balancing forces. And this movement itself is all the time
causing new changes which push the tax rate still higher, and so
on and so on. ‘This simple model of circular causation with cumu-
lative effects, released by a primary change, is, I believe, more
typical of actual social processes then the intersection of the
demand and supply curves at an equilibrium price which has
become symbolic of much of our reasoning in economic theory.
  If, nevertheless, in well-organised welfare states the local tax
rate does not continue on that adventurous course but is prevented
from rising too much, and if also the community is restrained from
lowering the standards of public services too much, this has quite
another explanation than the play of market forces: namely the
fact that national legislation has been enacted for the specific
                                  24
                Regional Economic Inequalities
purpose of stopping such a cumulative process by subsidising
from the common purse any individual community which for
reasons outside its own command has got into financial difficulties,
and at the same time prescribing certain minimum standards for
public services.
   Indeed, the modern highly integrated national states in the one-
sixth of the non-Soviet world which is well off and rapidly pro-
gressing have furnished themselves with a most complex network
of systems of regularised public interferences of all sorts which
have the common purpose of counteracting the blind law of
cumulative social change, and hindering it from causing inequali-
ties between regions, industries and social groups. To this
question of the countervailing changes induced by organised
society I shall come back in the next chapter.
   In my example the primary change was an adverse one. The
cumulative process, however, also works if the initial change is for
the better. The decision to locate an industry in a particular com-
munity, for instance, gives a spur to its general development.
Opportunities of employment and higher incomes are provided
for those unemployed before or employed in a less remunerative
way. Local businesses can flourish as the demand for their products
and services increases. Labour, capital and enterprise are attracted
from outside to exploit the expanding opportunities. The esta-
blishment of a new business or the enlargement of an old one
widens the market for others, as does generally the increase of
incomes and demand. Rising profits increase savings, but at the
same time investments go up still more, which again pushes up
the demand and the level of profits. And the expansion process
creates external economies favourable forsustaining its continuation.
  The local tax rate—the factor I picked out for a closer view on
the causal inter-relations in a downward cumulative process—can
be lowered, and the amount and quality of public services en-
hanced: both changes will make the community more attractive
to businesses and workers for this reason also, with the result that
the local finances will again be boosted, with similar results on the
tax rate and public finances, and so on.
                                 25
       Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
   These fiscal effects of localised expansion may be reduced as a
result of interferences by the state in the form of schemes for inter-
regional equalisation built into the taxation system; but as in the
present chapter I am still considering only the free play of the
market forces I shall neglect this possibility for the moment.

The Play of the Market Forces Works towards Inequality
   A cumulative process of the same general character, going down-
wards or upwards as the case may be, will also be generated by a
change in the terms of trade of a community or a region, if the
change is large and persistent enough or, indeed, by any other
change having as its effect a substantial decrease or increase in the
inter-related economic quantities: demand, earning power and
incomes, investment and production. The main idea I want to
convey is that the play of the forces in the market normally tends
to increase, rather than to decrease, the inequalities between
regions.
   If things were left to market forces unhampered by any policy
interferences, industrial production,   commerce,     banking, insur-
ance, shipping and, indeed, almost all those economic activities
which in a developing economy tend to give a bigger than average
return—and,   in addition, science, art, literature, education    and
higher culture generally—would cluster in certain localities and
regions, leaving the rest of the country more or less in a backwater.
   Occasionally these favoured localities and regions offer parti-
cularly good natural conditions for the economic activities concen-
trated there; in rather more cases they did so at the time when they
started to gain a competitive advantage. For naturally economic
geography   sets the stage.   Commercial    centres   are, of course,
usually located in places where there are reasonably good natural
conditions for the construction of a port, and centres for heavy
industry are most often located not too far away from coal and iron
resources,
   But within broad limits the power of attraction today of a centre
has its origin mainly in the historical accident that something was
once started there, and not in a number of other places where it
                                 26
                    Regional Economic Inequalities
could equally well or better have been started, and that the start
met with success. ‘Thereafter the ever-increasing internal and
external economies—interpreted in the widest sense of the word
to include, for instance, a working population trained in various
crafts, easy communications, the feeling of growth and elbow
room and the spirit of new enterprise—fortified and sustained
their continuous growth at the expense of other localities and
regions where instead relative stagnation or regression became
the pattern.

Migration, Capital Movement and Trade: the ‘‘ Backwash Effects”
   It is easy to see how expansion in one locality has ‘‘backwash
effects” in other localities. More specifically the movements of
labour, capital, goods and services do not by themselves counteract
the natural tendency to regional inequality. By themselves,
migration, capital movements and trade are rather the media
through which the cumulative process evolves—upwards in the
lucky regions and downwards in the unlucky ones. In general, if
they have positive results for the former, their effects on the latter
are negative.
   The localities and regions where economic activity is expanding
will attract net immigration from other parts of the country. As
migration is always selective, at least with respect to the migrant’s
age, this movement by itself tends to favour the rapidly growing
communities and disfavour the others.
   In the historical epoch—which is only just now coming to its end
in the very richest and most advanced countries—when birth-
control is still spreading to lower economic and social strata,” the
poorer regions will also have a relatively higher fertility. ‘This adds
its influence to that of the net emigration in making the age distri-
bution in these regions unfavourable; in the longer run it may also
cause a less favourable relation between total working population
and resources. The poverty in rural regions of Europe during the
   1 This statement will be qualified in the next section but one.
   2 When this process is completed, the average fertility might well be rather
high or at times even rising; but it is positively, and not negatively, correlated to
economic and social status.
                                         27
        Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
long period of net emigration to the industrial centres—and to
America—has a main explanation in the unfavourable age
distribution there, caused by migration and in part also by higher
fertility rates.
   Capital movements tend to have a similar effect of increasing
inequality. In the centres of expansion increased demand will spur
investment, which in its turn will increase incomes and demand
and cause a second round of investment, and so on. Saving will
increase as a result of higher incomes but will tend to lag behind
investment in the sense that the supply of capital will steadily meet
a brisk demand for it. In the other regions the lack of new ex-
pansionary momentum has the implication that the demand for
capital for investment remains relatively weak, even compared to
the supply of savings which will be low as incomes are low and
tending to fall. Studies in many countries have shown how the
banking system, if not regulated to act differently, tends to
become an instrument for siphoning off the savings from the
poorer regions to the richer and more progressive ones where
returns on capital are high and secure.
   Trade operates with the same fundamental bias in favour of the
richer and progressive regions against the other regions. The
freeing and widening of the markets will often confer such com-
petitive advantages on the industries in already established centres
of expansion, which usually work under conditions of increasing
returns, that even the handicrafts and industries existing earlier in
the other regions are thwarted. The hampering of industrial
growth in the poorer southern provinces of Italy, caused by the
pulling down of internal tariff walls after Italy’s political unifica-
tion in the last century, is a case in point which has been thoroughly
studied: industry in the northern provinces had such a lead, and
was so much stronger that it dominated the new national market,
which was the result of political unification, and suppressed
industrial efforts in the southern provinces.}
   1'The process was conditioned and encouraged by the liquidation of the
political and administrative centres in Southern Italy, while those in Northern
Italy, which at that time more than now were tools in the hands of the industrial
interests there, gained hegemony over the whole country. The unification of
                                      28
                    Regional Economic Inequalities
   As industrialisation is the dynamic force in this development,
it is almost tautological to state that the poorer regions remain
mainly agricultural: the perfection of the national markets will
even, as I have just mentioned, tend to frustrate earlier beginnings
of industrial diversification in agricultural regions. In the back-
ward regions of Southern Europe about three quarters of the
population get their livelihood from agriculture. In these regions
also, not only manufacturing industry and other non-agricultural
pursuits but agriculture itself show a much lower level of pro-
ductivity than in the richer regions.1

The “‘Non-economic Factors’’
   The cumulative processes towards regional inequality work
through many causal chains usually not accounted for in our
theoretical analysis of the play of market forces. I have already
referred to selectivity in migration and the effects of poverty on
fertility.
   If left to themselves, those regions which had not been touched
by the expansionary momentum could not afford to keep up a good
road system, and all their other public utilities would be inferior,
thus increasing their competitive disadvantages. Railways would
be built so as to meet the effective demand for transport, i.e.
without much consideration of the needs of those regions.
Italy was in reality very much a conquest and an annexation of Southern Italy
by the stronger North. The role of the state in the cumulative process will be
discussed in the next chapter.
   Another example on a still larger scale is the long economic stagnation after
the Civil War up till the Second World War of the Southern states of the United
States. As I shall argue in Chapter 5, this systematic bias of trade as between
regions forms also part of the mechanism of exploitation in the economic re-
lations between a metropolitan country and its colonies.
   1 Part of the stronger competitive position of industry in Northern Italy at the
time of Italy’s political unification was based on the fact that it also had a more
developed agriculture.
   Professor Jacob Viner makes the plausible point that “‘... the real problem
in poor countries is not agriculture as such, or the absence of manufactures as
such, but poverty and backwardness, poor agriculture and poor manufacture”’
(International Trade and Economic Development, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1953,
p. 52). This is supposed to be a criticism of Professor Raul Prebisch and others
who have urged industrialisation as the necessary mainstay in a programme of
economic development. As his argument is narrowly static, Viner, however,
misses entirely the point that industrialisation is intended to rectify an economy
in imbalance and to give a dynamic momentum.
                                        29
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
    On the same assumption the poorer regions, unaided, could
hardly afford much medical care and their populations would be
less healthy and have a lower productive efficiency. They would
have fewer schools and their schools would be grossly inferior—in
Southern Europe the population of the poorer regions is actually
still largely illiterate.
    The people living there would on the average be believers in the
more primitive variants of religion, sanctioning traditional mores
by taboos and functional magic, and they would be more super-
stitious and less rational generally. Their entire systems of
valuations would take on such an imprint of poverty and backward-
ness that they would become even less susceptible to the experi-
mental and ambitious aspirations of a developing society.
    All these frustrating effects of poverty, operating through other
media than those analysed by traditional economic theory, are
interlocked in circular causation, the one with the others and all
with the biases I referred to in the working of migration, capital
movements and trade. The opposite effects of rising economic
levels in the centres of expansion are in a similar fashion also inter-
connected in a circular causation, continuously sustaining further
expansion in a cumulative fashion.
   Economic theory has disregarded these so-called non-economic
factors and kept them outside the analysis. As they are among the
main vehicles for the circular causation in the cumulative processes
of economic change, this represents one of the principal short-
comings of economic theory. As I pointed out in Chapter 2 and
shall further pursue in Chapter 11, it explains largely why this
theory was unable to state the dynamic problems of economic
under-development and development—or, to formulate it differ-
ently, how this theory managed to avoid stating those problems.
   For easy reference I shall refer to all relevant adverse changes,
caused outside that locality, as the ‘backwash effects” of economic
expansion in a locality. I include under this label the effects via
migration, capital movements and trade as well as all the effects
via the whole gamut of other social relations exemplified above;
and the term refers to the total cumulated effects resulting from
                                  30
                 Regional Economic Inequalities
the process of circular causation between all the factors, ‘“‘non-
economic” as well as “‘economic’’.
   It should be pointed out in this connection that all history shows
that the cheap and often docile labour of under-developed regions
does not usually attract industry. The few examples where the
labour supply has been effective in bringing industry to backward
regions—the movement of textile industry from New England to
the Upper South in the United States is one case—are rather in
the nature of exceptions to a general rule. There are so many
forces working in the opposite direction, among them the external
economies in the established centres of economic expansion.
Ordinarily it is labour which has to move to the localities of rising
demand and there make the difficult effort of adjustment to the
different ways and values of an expanding society.

 The “Spread Effects”
   Against the backwash effects there are, however, also certain
centrifugal “spread effects” of expansionary momentum from the
centres of economic expansion to other regions. It is natural that
the whole region around a nodal centre of expansion should gain
from the increasing outlets of agricultural products and be stimu-
lated to technical advance all along the line.
   There is also another line of centrifugal spread effects to localities
farther away, where favourable conditions exist for producing raw
materials for the growing industries in the centres; if a sufficient
number of workers become employed in these other localities even
consumer goods industries will be given a spur there. ‘These, and
also all other localities where new starts are being made and happen
to succeed, become in their turn, if the expansionary momentum
is strong enough to overcome the backwash effects from the older
centres, new centres of self-sustained economic expansion.
   The spread effects of momentum from a centre of industrial
expansion to other localities and regions, operating through
increased demands for their products and in many other ways,
weave themselves into the cumulating social process by circular
causation in the same fashion as the backwash effects in opposition
                                   31
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
to which they set up countervailing changes. They represent a
complication of the main hypothesis that in the normal case the
changes in other factors which are called forth as reactions by a
change in one factor, always tend to move the system in the same
direction as the first change.
   In no circumstances, however, do the spread effects establish
the assumptions for an equilibrium analysis. In the marginal case
the two kinds of effects will balance each other and a region will be
“stagnating”. But this balance is not a stable equilibrium, for any
change in the forces will start a cumulative movement upwards or
downwards.
   In reality, the expanding, stagnating and regressing localities
are arranged in a fairly continuous series on different levels, with
all possible graduations between the extremes. Insofar as in the
aggregate all the dispersed industrial advances amount to some-
thing considerable, economic standards in the whole country are
given a lift.
    It is quite possible that all the regions in a country may be
inside this margin of balancing forces—if the initial starts are many
and strong and successful enough and if the centrifugal spread
effects work relatively effectively. The problem of inequalities then
becomes a problem of the different rates of progress between
regions in the country. But ordinarily, even in a rapidly developing
 country, many regions will be lagging behind, stagnating or even
 becoming poorer; and there would be more regions in the last two
 categories if market forces alone were left to decide the outcome.
  Even in such countries as the United States or Sweden, where in
the last century business enterprise has been able to exploit a
particularly favourable situation as regards natural resources, and
where other unusually advantageous conditions for economic
growth have also been present, not least in the general cultural
situation, developments have not been such as to draw the whole
country into a more or less equal and simultaneous expansion
process. A closer view reveals great disparities. In the United
States, for example, almost the whole of the region usually
referred to as the South was until recently largely a stagnating one.
                                  32
                  Regional Economic Inequalities
Similarly, the emergence some generations ago of the great new
opportunities in agriculture on the Western frontier left large rural
areas in New England in a decay from which some of them have
not yet emerged.
  A country where, on the contrary, few starts are being made
and/or where the starts do not happen to result in a substantial and
sustained increase in demand, incomes, investment and produc-
tion, becomes an under-developed country.            Even there, however,
as in several Latin American countries, there are usually localities
and regions which are advancing industrially.

Two Broad Correlations
   The Secretariat of the United Nations’ Economic Commission
for Europe has for several years devoted increasing attention to the
empirical study of the problem of regional development and under-
development in various European countries. The results so far
reached have been published in the annual Economic Surveys of
Europe. In 1955 a more comprehensive analysis of these problems
was contained in a separate chapter of the Survey.! From this
study I want only to quote two main conclusions.
   The first one is that in Western Europe disparities of income
between one region and another are much wider in the poorer
countries than in the richer ones. If we use such a simple measure
of regional inequality as the proportion of the total population of a
country living in regions where the average income is less than
two-thirds of the national average, we find that this proportion
amounted to only a few per cent in Great Britain and Switzerland,
to some ten per cent in such countries as Norway and France, and
to about one-third in Italy, Turkey and Spain.
   The second conclusion is that while the regional inequalities
have been diminishing in the richer countries of Western Europe,
the tendency has been the opposite in the poorer ones.
   1“Problems of Regional Development and Industrial Location in Europe”
Economic Survey of Europe in 1954, Geneva, 1955, pp. 136ff.
   2 Not only the inequalities within each country but also the differences in
relative inequality between countries would have appeared much greater, if the
administrative division into regions used for the tabulation had been more
adequate to the problem studied.
                                      33
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
  A large part of the explanation for these two broad correlations
may be found in the important fact that the higher the level of
economic development that a country has already attained, the
stronger the spread effects will usually be. For a high average level
of development is accompanied by improved transportation and
communications, higher levels of education, and a more dynamic
communion of ideas and values—all of which tends to strengthen
the forces for the centrifugal spread of economic expansion or to
remove the obstacles for its operation.
   The neutralisation of the backwash effects, when a country
reaches a high level of development where the spread effects are
strong, will itself spur on economic development, and so become
an important factor in the cumulative process. For with the
extinction of abject poverty on a large scale goes a fuller utilisation
of the potentialities of the human resources in a nation. This is one
of the reasons why rapid and sustained progress becomes an
almost automatic process when once a country has reached a high
level of development.
   In contrast, part of the curse of a low average level of develop-
ment in an under-developed country is the fact that the spread
effects there are weak. This means that as a rule the free play of the
market forces in a poor country will work more powerfully to
create regional inequalities and to widen those which already
exist. ‘That a low level of economic development is accompanied
as a rule by great economic inequalities represents itself a major
impediment to progress. It tends to hold the under-developed
countries down. This is one of the interlocking relations by which
in the cumulative process “‘poverty becomes its own cause’.
   I cannot overcome the temptation to repeat my quotation from
the Bible: ““For unto every one that hath shall be given, and he
shall have abundance: but from him that hath not shall be taken
away even that which he hath.”’ That there is a tendency inherent
in the free play of market forces to create regional inequalities, and
that this tendency becomes the more dominant the poorer a coun-
try is, are two of the most important laws of economic under-
development and development under laissez-faire.
                                  34
                Regional Economic Inequalities
   In this chapter I am disregarding interferences by the state.
In the next chapter, where I discuss the role of the state, my
general point is that the activity of the state will tend rather to
support those forces which result in the two broad correlations
which I have been discussing.

Examples of Other Counteracting Changes
   There are a great number of complications and qualifications
that in a more elaborate analysis would have to be fitted into the
model I am outlining of circular causation of a cumulative social
process. They are all related to exceptions from the hypothesis
that the causation is circular.
   If there are counteracting changes the cumulative effect will be
weakened and the process may even be stopped altogether. But
even in the accidental event that the forces come to balance each
other, the assumption for an equilibrium analysis will ordinarily
not be established, for the balance will be unstable. On both
sides of such a fortuitous balance the system will entail a cumula-
tive process in the causation of which, however, not all changes
are unidirectional and connected.
   Among counteracting changes there are those which may be
recognised as “external dis-economies’’, if the term be allowed.
There may be factors inherent in the situation of a centre of
economic expansion which tend to retard or, when it has reached a
certain level of development, even to reverse the cumulative
process, by causing an increase in public expenditure and perhaps
in private costs, because industry and population become too
concentrated. Once again this can be stated in the homely terms
of folk wisdom: ‘“Trees can never grow as high as heaven.”
   To the same category would belong the depressing effects of
decreasing demand in a “maturing economy’’, if this pessimistic
theory, cultivated during the Great Depression, particularly in
America, were correct—which, however, I doubt, except in very
special circumstances.
   It may also be that in a centre of expansion wages and the
remuneration of other factors of production will be driven up to
                                oD
        Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
such a high level that other regions get a real chance to compete
successfully. Or a prolonged period of economic expansion may
have saddled a prosperous region with a very large stock of old
capital equipment which it is tempting not to discard as rapidly as
would be advantageous in a period of swift technological develop-
ment.   Moreover, a country which, thanks to an early start, has for
some time enjoyed a quasi-monopolistic position may find that the
spirit of enterprise and risk-taking has been damaged.+
   In the opposite case, a downward cumulative process may also
give rise to endogenous countervailing forces and come to a halt.
The cruel Malthusian checks of classical population theory—a
rise in death rates when population increase had pressed down
consumption below the subsistence level—were examples of such
countervailing changes. These checks set a limit beyond which
regression could not proceed and thus established a lower limit to
the process. Assuming a permanency in the forces operating in the
direction of economic regression, equilibrium at this low level
would indeed for once be a stable one. The recent explosive
development of medical science, making the prevention of death
even at exceedingly low standards of living a rather easy and
inexpensive matter, has tended to weaken the population checks,
and thus moved the stagnation equilibrium to a much more
depressed level of human misery.
   Naturally, in the short run, in all countries and in all regions
at all times the equilibrating interplay of countervailing changes in
demand, supply and price—to which economic theory has devoted
such a disproportionate amount of attention—will be operating
more or less according to that theory. This interplay, however,
usually represents only the ripples on the surface.
   In general, changes of anticipation consequent on more primary
changes tend rather to push a cumulative process in the same
direction; this agrees with the main hypothesis. Thus, already an

   1 An analysis of these and other factors which may retard an expansionary
movement, as they operated in Europe in the period between the two world
wars, is contained in Professor Ingvar Svennilson’s Growth and Stagnation in
the European Economy, United Nations’ Economic Commission for Europe,
Geneva, 1954.
                                    36
                   Regional Economic Inequalities
expectation on the part of the white population that the Negro
plane of living will rise normally tends to decrease white prejudice.
In certain regions of the South in America and, in particular, among
the poor whites who compete most closely with the Negroes, such
an expectation may, however, at least for a time, instead cause
rising resentment and increased prejudice, which then introduces
an opposite secondary reaction but, of course, no equilibrium.          _
   When rising prices cause people to expect further price increases,
this will normally induce them to buy more and sell less, so that
the primary tendency of the prices to rise will be strengthened, and
this agrees with our hypothesis of circular causation. Indeed, it
was mainly to the part played by anticipations in the cumulative
movement of an economy away from price stability that Wicksell
attributed the acceleration of the process in its later stages.1 But, of
course, it is possible that people may be so conditioned by theory
or earlier experience that they will expect that after a rise in prices
there will follow a fall; this then, of course, has the contrary effect.
   A realistic study of any social process will have to reckon with
a great variety of differently inter-related changes in response to a
primary change, and I do not deny that sometimes those changes
are inter-linked in such a way as to counteract each other. Never-
theless, I believe that when main trends over somewhat longer
periods are under consideration, the changes will in the main
support each other and thus tend to be cumulative in their net
effects.

Changes in General Business Conditions
   It has to be remembered, however, that long-term changes are
nothing more than the cumulative results of a succession of short-
run changes, among which are the short-term fluctuations in the
general business conditions of a country. A boom implies a
generalised spur to expansion over the whole economic field. It
will perhaps usually have its most powerful effects in the esta-
blished industrial centres, but may induce a number of new starts
  1 Wicksell’s policy goal of a constant price level was not to be expected as an
outcome of the play of the forces in the market but as a result of intentional
monetary policy.
                                      37
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
in other localities or encourage lagging activity—the result of
earlier starts, which were losing momentum—to continue. A
boom will probably always increase the relative strength of the
spread effects. A depression will decrease it.
   Changes in general business conditions are traditionally dealt
with as “the business cycle problem” and this tradition has
continued long after these changes seem to have lost every appear-
ance of being cyclical. This is, of course, due to our recognition
that there are in the system self-generating changes of the counter-
vailing type, though not contained in the same time-space, and
this is also my reason for referring to the problem in the present
section. Business cycle research has been dominated by the time
series: interest has been focused on the aggregate changes from
one point or period of time to another, while disregarding the
differences in geographic space and even the changes in time of
these spatial differences.
   I believe that more intensive research on the changes in general
business conditions, focused more specifically on their conse-
quences for economic development, would be rewarding. This
would imply research on the differences between localities and
regions, as those differences change under the influence of the play
of forces in the market during changes in general business
conditions.




                                 38
                            CHAPTER    4

               THE     ROLE     OF    TLHE,S TALE

Egalitarian State Policies in the Richer Countries
   In the last chapter I referred to a recent study of regional de-
velopment and under-development in Western Europe and
stressed two main conclusions from the study:
   (i) that regional inequalities are much      wider in the poorer
countries than in the richer ones; and
   (ii) that while regional inequalities have been diminishing in the
richer countries, the tendency has been the opposite in the poorer
countries.
 I brought forward as an explanation of these two broad correla-
 tions the fact that the spread effects, being themselves a function
 of the level of economic development actually attained, will be
 stronger in the richer and weaker in the poorer countries. Under
laissez-faire this would tend to make the inequalities in the poorer
countries bigger and increasing. It would be possible to conceive
a situation where in a very rich country the spread effects would
on the average be stronger than the backwash effects with the
result that inequalities would actually be diminishing as an effect
of the play of the market forces.
    Of equal importance for the explanation of the two broad
correlations is another fact, namely that without exception all the
richer countries in Western Europe have in recent generations
been approaching the “welfare state’. In these countries state
policies have been initiated which are directed towards greater
regional equality: the market forces which result in backwash
effects have been offset, while those resulting in spread effects have
been supported.
   In the poorer countries, on the other hand, there has been less
of such policies, and the market forces have been given freer play—
                                 39
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
and we recall that, as the spread effects are weaker there as a rule,
they are more forceful in creating regional inequalities. In many
of the poorer countries the natural drift towards inequalities has
been supported and magnified by built-in feudal and other in-
egalitarian institutions and power structures which aid the rich in
exploiting the poor.
   In explaining why the richer and the poorer countries have this
difference in state policies, we have again to point to circular
causation. For one thing the poorer countries have remained poor
partly because in recent generations the efforts to institute national
integration policies have been weak, while, on the contrary, the
richer countries have succeeded in maintaining their economic
progress by carrying out such policies more forcefully. Again, as
with the spread effects, it is a question of using more or less fully
the human resources of a country.
   The egalitarian policies of the modern welfare state are not
inexpensive. ‘To the benefits received by the poorer regions in a
country correspond sacrifices for the richer regions, at least
temporarily. Egalitarian policies therefore meet with greater
difficulties in a poorer country, although it needs them more
because the weakness of the spread effects has created greater in-
equalities. This is yet another example of circular causation in the
cumulative process: again “poverty becomes its own cause’’.
   In the richer countries, on the other hand, economic progress
and rising levels of income mean more elbow room for everybody,
and therefore give more force to the ideals of rational generosity.
When people are better off and have greater security, they feel
freer to give up privileges, and to let down barriers which keep
others out and are more prepared to carry the costs of common
burdens. And this process, in its turn, strengthens the foundation
for continuous economic progress.
   In the system of causation the two types of influence—market
forces and policies—are interlocked in still another way. A more
effective counter-action of the backwash effects by stronger spread
effects—and, consequently, less of a tendency to regional in-
equalities—gives a firmer political basis for egalitarian policies.
                                   40
                      The Role of the State
As, in their turn, those policies result in greater equality, demo-
cracy becomes more firmly based as it develops. In the opposite
case, to the weakness of the spread effects in a poor country
correspond greater economic inequalities: this is inimical to the
growth of an effective democracy which could form the power
basis for the egalitarian policies such a country particularly needs,
precisely because of the relative weakness of the spread effects
and the strength of the backwash effects.
   Generally speaking, on a low level of economic development
with relatively weak spread effects, the competitive forces in the
markets will, by circular causation, constantly be tending towards
regional inequalities, while the inequalities themselves will be
holding back economic development, and at the same time
weakening the power basis for egalitarian policies. A higher level
of development will strengthen the spread effects and tend to
hamper the drift towards regional inequalities; this will sustain
economic development, and at the same time create more favour-
able conditions for policies directed at decreasing regional in-
equalities still further. The more effectively a national state
becomes a welfare state—motivated in a way which approaches a
more perfect democracy, and having at its disposal national re-
sources big enough to carry out large-scale egalitarian policies
with bearable sacrifices on the part of the regions and groups that
are relatively better off—the stronger will be both the urge and
the capacity to counteract the blind market forces which tend to
result in regional inequalities; and this, again, will spur economic
development in the country, and so on and so on, in circular
causation.
   These statements are broad generalisations, as a “theory” is
permitted to be. They grasp the social facts as they organise
themselves into a pattern when viewed under a bird’s-eye per-
spective. The special characteristics and circumstances of every
country, every region and, indeed, every acting individual—
differences in natural resources and their dispersal in a country,
international relations, historical traditions in regard to production
activity, national and group cohesion, religions and ideologies, and
                                 41
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
economic, social and political initiative and leadership, etcetera—
will result in elaborate variations on the theme. They can, how-
ever, all be fitted into this general view of circular causation in a
cumulative sequence, while they cannot be integrated into our
inherited theories dominated by the equilibrium approach, and
the distinction between “‘economic” and “non-economic” factors.

The ‘“‘Oppressor State”
   The term ‘“‘state” is used here to include all organised inter-
ferences with the market forces. The defence for this terminology
is the fact that in modern times the state has in fact become the
main manifestation of this organised society, and has established
itself as the controlling framework for practically all the interfer-
ences by other institutions and power groupings within a country.
    The traditional role of the “‘state’” in this inclusive sense was
mainly to serve as a means for supporting the cumulative process
tending towards inequality. It was the economically advancing
and wealthier regions and social groups which were the more active
and effective in organising their efforts, and they usually had the
resources to stop organisational efforts by the others. And so the
“‘state’’—which stands here for organised society—usually became
their tool in advancing their interests.
    Feudalism was a huge collusion between the rich and mighty to
lay a hold on the land and seize power to tax the peasants. The
cities enforced their ‘privileges’ upon the surrounding rural
regions: the merchants and industrialists in the cities protected
themselves against competition from outside. In the cities the
 richer classes protected themselves effectively against the poorer:
labour regulations not only in the mercantilist state but much
 earlier were weighted against the workers, and their general pur-
 pose was to keep down wages and to keep up the supply of labour.
    The heavy anti-state and anti-organisation bias of the classical
 economists was thus in their time more of a truly “‘liberal’’ position.
 Their whole theory was built up in protest against the pre-
 industrial state which can in general be characterised as an
 “oppressor state’.
                                   42
                      The Role of the State
   The early stages of the industrial revolution saw the breaking
down of many of the regulations of the “‘oppressor state”, protect-
ing the rich against the poor. But for a long time the result was
not a development towards greater economic equality. Study of
the miserable living conditions of the workers in the early stages of
industrialisation served as a basis of the revolutionary doctrines
of Marx and Engels, and was also the source of indignation and
inspiration for Dickens, Zola and a host of other social novelists of
the nineteenth century.
   In the pre-democratic, individualistic age of early capitalism,
keeping living standards low for the masses of people was the
means of creating the large-scale saving and capital formation
which was necessary for rapid economic development. With the
spur to accelerated population increase, which occurred at that
time, and the technical advances in agriculture, which released
labour, the supply of labour became so large that the holding down
of wages could be accomplished without mercantilist regulations,
simply by releasing the market forces.

The Long History of Policies for Economic Development of Under-
   developed Regions
   But it should not be overlooked that even in the poorest and
least progressive countries, policy actions were now and then taken
by the state to counteract the tendencies towards inequality.
   The under-privileged groups pressed for greater equality. From
time immemorial, history records uprisings of the poor against the
rich, the exploited countryside against the city, the peasants against
the landlord. When successful, these revolts by the under-
privileged received the sanction of the state.
   In Sweden “‘land reforms” were centuries ago pressed through
time and time again, often more radical than those at present
carried out or planned in under-developed countries. The proud
words of the Swedish Constitution—which in free translation may
be given in the following form: “The right of the Swedish people
from the most ancient time to be taxed only with its free consent is
exercised by Parliament”—refer to this important and singular
                                 4S
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
historical fact, that in Sweden the claims of feudal lords were at all
times continuously nipped in the bud by the revolts of the farmers,
who thus retained through the centuries fairly intact property
rights to the land and thereby also their freedom as citizens.
   From the earliest times national states, when they came into
being, almost always relied partly upon popular appeal and there-
fore almost always exerted a certain amount of countervailing
power against the tendency to regional inequality. Every national
state took some responsibility for common services, and for build-
ing roads and raising the level of technology in the backward
regions—though ordinarily in a poor country an unduly large
part of the meagre public funds devoted to such purposes served
the richer regions.
   In the planning of railways considerations of short-term pro-
fitability, as I mentioned, worked to the advantage of the richer
regions. But from the beginning in most countries another pur-
pose was also operative, namely to open up under-developed
regions, and freight rates took this into account to some extent.
The same applies to the building of electrical power stations and
distribution networks. As the banking system developed, some
precautions were often taken rather early in the laws regulating
this activity to preserve a measure of control over capital resources
in the interest of the less industrialised regions; later on specialised
financial institutions were established and subsidised to serve their
particular credit needs.
   As the revolution in ocean transport exposed the European
farmers to severe competition, with the result that those engaged in
agriculture tended to be remunerated much less generously than —
other workers, protection for the price of agricultural products
was built into the system of economic policies of many countries.
Measures to aid the starting of new industries in stagnant regions
and to protect existing ones were common in almost all countries
from a still earlier stage. In some countries the beginnings of
legislation to protect tenants against absentee landowners and
farmers against the big corporations, formed to exploit the water
power and the forests, were also made long ago.
                                  44
                      The Role of the State
   These policies were weak, particularly in the now poorer and
relatively stagnating countries, and for a long time usually much
more than outweighed by other policies framed to favour the richer
regions. But they were always present in some measure. In fact,
policies for the economic development of under-developed regions
are as old as the national states themselves.
   The main vehicles for these strivings towards regional equalisa-
tion measures were the national parliaments. As they developed
and gradually afforded a platform for grievances, this policy trend
gathered momentum. The poor are the many and even the
relatively poor are the great majority, wherever the voting line is
drawn. In order to gain power political parties had to sponsor
reforms in the interest of greater regional equality; this became
the more necessary as later the electorate was gradually enlarged.
   Popular movements and interest organisations played their
important role. Individuals from the privileged classes went over
to the other side and contributed leadership to the poor. ‘The more
advanced states perfected more and more complicated systems of
laws and regulations favouring the poorer regions and the poorer
classes generally.
   A considerable part of the equalising measures took the form of
transferring ever more functions to be provided for out of the
public purse, and of transferring the financial responsibility,
partially or entirely, to ever larger units: from the local community
to the province and from both to the state. This happened
gradually to road building and road upkeep, to the provision of
clinics and hospitals, to the responsibility for sanitation, for
health protection, for education. At the same time minimum
standards for public services provided by the municipalities were
enforced, and schemes designed to mitigate inequalities as between
provinces and communities were embodied in the general tax
system, usually considerably earlier than progressive taxation.
The institutions to provide professional training, better market
outlets, credit and the like for the poorer regions proliferated and
were made stronger.
   Already a little more than half a century ago there began in the
                                 45
       Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
advanced countries the development towards social security
reforms, and a couple of decades later towards progressive taxa-
tion, two mighty policy trends which have forcefully contributed
to equalisation even as between regions.
   I believe it would be a rewarding task to make an intensive com-
parative analysis of this development in the richer countries from
the ‘‘oppressor state” to the “‘welfare state” from the main view-
points of its inter-relation with economic progress and its character
as part of a cumulative social process. There would be many indivi-
dual differences as between the several countries, particularly in
regard to timing, but I believe that the main conclusion would
nevertheless be that the broad patterns of historical sequence were
fundamentally similar as well as the circular causal mechanism of
social, economicand political factors making the process cumulative.
   In the main the trend has been in the direction of greater
equality of opportunity and this trend has all the time been related
to a rising level of economic development. But in the pre-demo-
cratic stage of early capitalism, the rapid increase of labour supply
and other circumstances caused wages to remain low while profits
were flourishing, providing for the large savings necessary for the
rapid development.
   It can be argued that at that stage the inequalities were a neces-
sary condition for progress, and perhaps also the lack of political
democracy which made their continuation possible. In a lecture
on “Democratic Values”, Mr. Aneurin Bevan, after having
stressed that ““democracy as we know it today is a product of the
twentieth century”, continued:
     It is highly doubtful whether the achievements of the Indust-
  rial Revolution would have been permitted if the franchise had
  been universal. It is very doubtful, because a great deal of the
  capital aggregations that we are at present enjoying are the
  results of the wages that our fathers went without.1
Even   if this were   true historically, for a transitional     period, a
parallel course in those under-developed countries which are now
planning economic development might not be necessary, or
         1 Democratic Values, Fabian Tract No. 282, London, 1950.
                                   46
                     The Role of the State
desirable, or even possible.   To this question I shall return in
Chapter 7.

A “Created Harmony”
   In a very few countries we have by now reached a situation
where no large social groups and, consequently, no regions, are
permitted to be really poor and, even more important, where the
opportunities for the newly born are becoming more and more
equal.
   As I pointed out, this implies among other things that the
productive powers of the entire population are brought nearer to
their real potential. The reforms as they have evolved have at
every point of time continuously contributed to raising what the
classical economists called “the quality of the factors of pro-
duction”. By thus raising the level of national productivity the
reforms have themselves provided the additional resources
required for making them economically feasible and for securing
at the same time further continued social reform policy.
   A main explanation of why these few countries can now be
characterised as highly integrated is to be found in the complex
networks of systems of state interferences, preventing any region,
industry or social group from lagging far behind in its develop-
ment. The interferences get their support from the sentiment of
national solidarity in countries where the ideals of liberty and
equality have been operative social forces. ‘The gradual realisation
of these ideals has in its turn strengthened them, and thereby the
basis of solidarity for national policy.
   Economic progress has supported the spread effects of expan-
sionary momentum, hampered the trend towards inequalities and
thus also solidified the basis for democracy. It has at the same
time created easier conditions for mutual generosity, which have
made the enactment of the equalising state policies gradually more
possible. In its turn the greater equality of circumstances in these
countries has sustained economic progress.
   Thus policies for national integration, including regional equali-
sation, themselves represent only a phase of the cumulative social
                                 47
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
process of economic development—though this process has to be
conceived of as of a higher order since it includes also, in addition
to the evolution of the market forces, people’s political attitudes,
interferences by the state and, in fact, the entire political process.
In these countries social and economic reforms now develop further
by their own momentum as almost incidental to economic progress
—which has been, and continues to be, in part due to their results.
   The need for “‘reformers” has diminished as now the reforms
come without the necessity to fight for them. The distributional
conflicts become minimised and their continuous gradual solution
secured by the expected general rise in production. To preserve
full employment and spur on the rise in production becomes in an
ever more egalitarian society the main policy goal, and it is com-
monly shared by all regions and groups.
   In some of these countries agreement in basic policy issues has
become so great that their internal political life has lost much of
its earlier dramatic interest. In this situation political parties,
trade and professional organisations and other pressure groups are
busy whipping up public attention to ever pettier interests. In
fact, they almost have to do so in order to defend their raison
d’étre. It may seem paradoxical, but is a fact that a national com-
munity which has proceeded far towards harmony of interests will
often show a particularly large amount of mutual dissatisfaction,
inter-group squabbles and bickering.
   At least superficially this becomes the mark of an advanced
state of national integration, i.e. at least so far as people’s attitudes
are reflected in public discussion dominated by those organised
social forces. Even if people’s attitudes are affected, to an extent,
by what goes on at this level of public controversy, behind all the
lamentation there is usually a common recognition of the lack of
serious grievances, a quiet contentedness.
   If these few countries demonstrate an approach to harmony of
individual interests—as, indeed, they definitely do—this is,
however, not the old harmony of natural law, utilitarianism and
the economic equilibrium theory, brought about by natural forces
in the market. It is to a large extent a “created harmony”,
                                   48
                      The Role of the State
created through policy interferences by organised society with the
operation of market forces which, if left to themselves, would have
led to disharmony. And the approach to harmony of interests is
narrowly restricted to the nation. The welfare state is nationalistic.

The Price System
   One closing word on the operation of the price system. In
highly integrated national states, the conditions under which the
price system operates have, in this cumulative social process, been
radically influenced by the legislation and administration of the
state, by the organisations of different interests of all sorts which,
in those countries, tend to become quasi-public institutions, and
by individual private businesses which, contrary to the assump-
tions of the theory of price formation under free competition, are
powerful enough to influence demand or supply and, consequently,
prices.
   Prices are manipulated. ‘They are not the outcome only of the
forces in the market; they are in a sense “political prices”, depend-
ing also on the regulating activity of the state, of quasi-public and
private organisations and of private businesses. The state inter-
ferences in the price system are, in a sense, the ultimate ones as,
under the direction of the political process in a democracy, they
are framed to regulate, offset or support the non-state interferences
in order to make the total outcome correspond to the valuations
and objectives which emerge from the democratic political
process.
   Within this institutional framework the price system functions,
and apparently quite satisfactorily. It can even be stated that it is
precisely in these countries that the price system is given a real
chance to function, and function well. In the less well integrated
countries, on the other hand—where the spread effects are weaker
and where, furthermore, the state allows freer play to the “‘natural”’
forces and has, in fact, because of the general poverty so much less
scope for policy interferences—even short-term changes are con-
tinuously liable to start a development towards some sort of
public disaster.
                                  49
                              CHAPTER     5

          INTERNATIONAL                INEQUALITIES

Assumptions for the Analysis
    In this chapter, in which I deal with the problem of inter-
national inequalities, I shall, as in the preceding two, be interested
only in the broadest structure of essential facts and causal relations,
not, at this stage, in particular cases. The general theory of under-
development and development for which I am reaching should
explain those facts and relations which are common and essential.
It should have, at the same time, the capacity to encompass in
successive stages of concreteness the special circumstances of
individual under-developed countries.
    My main hypothesis throughout is that normally a social process
is: cumulative because of circular causation. I begin by assuming a
sort of laissez-faire in the sense, first, that there are no interferences
with the play of market forces from an organised world community
and, second, that national policies in the under-developed coun-
tries are not different from what they traditionally have been in
very poor countries. ‘Towards the end of the present chapter I
shall discuss the realism of the first assumption, and in the next
two chapters I deal with the problem of national state policies and
economic planning.
   The discussion in the last two chapters of the problem of
regional inequalities within individual countries is relevant to the
present analysis of international inequalities for two reasons.
Firstly, to a large extent the two problems are similar. Secondly,
the internal inequalities in very poor countries are of paramount
relevance for the international inequalities between countries.
As we shall see, the two types of inequality are a cause of each other
in the circular way of the cumulative process.
    We have seen that within the national boundaries of a few of the
 richest countries an integration process has taken place which is
                                  50
                    International Inequalities
now being carried forward towards a high level of equality of
opportunity for all in whatever circumstances they happen to be
born. This development is a joint result of the strong spread effects
and the egalitarian policies in the richer countries. Both these
main factors are in circular causation interwoven with each other,
and also with economic progress and a high level of development.
   All the countries outside this small group of rich and progressive
countries are in varying degrees poorer and usually less progressive
economically as well. They are ridden by internal economic
inequalities, which also tend to weaken the effectiveness of their
system of democratic government in the case where they are not
under one form or another of oligarchic or outright dictatorial rule.
   The relations between relative lack of national economic integra-
tion and relative economic backwardness run both ways. To a low
level of economic development correspond low levels of social
mobility, communications, and popular education; this implies
greater impediments to the spread effects of expansionary momen-
tum. At the same time the poorer nations have for much the same
reasons and because of the very fact of existing internal inequalities
often been less democratic and, in any case, have, because they are
poorer, been up against narrower financial and, at bottom, psycho-
logical limitations on policies seeking to equalise opportunities.
In addition, inequality of opportunities has contributed to pre-
serving a low “‘quality” of their factors of production and a low
“effectiveness” of their productive efforts, and this has hampered
their economic development.

The Effects of Trade, Capital Movements and Migration
   On the international as on the national level trade does not by
itself necessarily work for equality. It may, on the contrary, have
strong backwash effects on the under-developed countries.
   A widening of markets often strengthens in the first instance the
rich and progressive countries whose manufacturing industries
have the lead and are already fortified by the surrounding external
economies, while the under-developed countries are in continuous
danger of seeing even what they have of industry and, in particular,
                                 51
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
small-scale industry and handicrafts priced out by cheap imports
from the industrial countries, if they do not protect them.
   Examples are easy to find of under-developed countries whose
entire culture has been impoverished as trading contacts with the
outside world have developed. In Baghdad, for example, of the old
handicrafts for which the city was famous there survive only a few
silversmiths who themselves have adopted patterns from abroad
requiring less craftsmanship. Similarly, it is only with the greatest
difficulty that one can buy a book of Arabic literature, while cheap
magazines in English or Arabic abound.
   The main positive effect of international trade on the under-
developed countries has in fact been to promote the production of
primary products; and such production, employing mostly un-
skilled labour, has come to constitute the bulk of their exports. In
these lines, however, they often meet inelastic demands in the
export market, often also a demand trend which is not rising very
rapidly, and excessive   price fluctuations.   When,   furthermore,
population is rapidly rising while the larger part of it lives at or
near the subsistence level—which means that there is no scarcity
of unskilled labour—any technological improvement in their export
production tends to transfer the advantages from the cheapening
of production to the importing countries. Since the demand is
often inelastic the market will not be greatly enlarged.
   ‘The advice—and assistance—which the poorer countries receive
from the richer is, even nowadays, often directed towards increas-
ing their production of primary goods for export. The advice is
certainly given in good faith, and it may even be rational from the
short-term point of view of one under-developed country seen in
isolation. Ina broader perspective and from a long-term point of
view, what would be rational is above all to increase productivity,
incomes and living standards in the larger agricultural subsistence
sectors, so as to raise the supply price of labour, and in manu-
facturing industry. ‘This would engender economic development
and raise incomes.
   But trade by itself does not lead to such a development; it rather
tends to have backwash effects and to strengthen the forces
                                 52
                   International Inequalities
maintaining stagnation or regression. Economic development has
to be brought about by policy interferences either by the world
community or by the individual under-developed country—two
possibilities which are outside our purview at this stage of the
argument when we are analysing only the effects of the play of
market forces.
    Nor can capital movements be relied upon to counteract inter-
national inequalities. In the circumstances described, capital will,
on the whole, shun the under-developed countries, particularly as
the advanced countries themselves are rapidly developing further
and can offer to owners of capital both good profits and security.
    The capital which in earlier times found its way to the countries
we today call under-developed, went to economic enclaves con-
 trolled from abroad and mainly devoted to the production of
 primary products for export. They were usually so profitable to
 their owners that they rapidly became self-supporting so far as
 investment capital was concerned. A somewhat larger capital
 export went to investments in railways and other public utilities
 made secure by the political controls of colonial governments.
 The bulk of European overseas capital exports went, however, to
 the settlements in the open spaces in the temperate zones which
 were becoming populated by emigration from Europe.
  After the collapse, which has not been remedied, of the inter-
national capital market in the early thirties and later the break-
down of the colonial system, which had given security to the
foreign investor, it would be almost against nature if capital were
to move voluntarily on a big scale to under-developed countries.
True, capital is scarce in these countries; but the need for it does
not represent an effective demand in the capital market.
   Rather, if there were no exchange controls and if, at the same
time, there were no elements in their national development policies
securing high profits for capital—i.e. if the forces in the capital
market were given unhampered play—capitalists in under-
developed countries would be exporting their capital. Even with
such controls and policies in existence, there is actually a steady
capital flight going on from under-developed countries which, in a
                                  53
       Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
realistic analysis, should be counted against what there is of
capital inflow to them.
   Labour migration, finally, can be safely ignored as a factor of
importance for international economic adjustment as between
under-developed and developed countries. The population pres-
sure in most under-developed countries implies, of course, that
they do not need immigration, and the consequent low wages
mean that immigrants are not tempted to come. Emigration from
these countries would instead be the natural thing; but for various
reasons emigration could not be much of a real aid to economic
development, even if it were possible.
   And it is not possible. The whole world has since the First
World War gradually settled down to a situation where immigrants
are on the whole not welcome. By and large, tourism apart, people
have to stay in the country where they are born. And so far as the
larger part of the under-developed world is concerned, where
people are “‘coloured”’ according to the definition in the countries
which are white or white-dominated, and at the same time better
off economically, emigration is usually stopped altogether by the
colour bar set up either by the legislation or in the administration
of those countries.

The Weak Spread Effects
   Emigration, therefore, offers no serious prospect of relief to
the poorer countries. And if left unregulated, international trade
and capital movements would be the media through which
economic progress in the advanced countries would have backwash
effects in the under-developed world. ‘The mode of operation of
these effects would be very much the same as it is in the circular
cumulation of causes in the development process within a single
country as analysed in Chapter 3. Internationally, however, the
backwash effects of trade and capital movements would dominate
the outcome much more, as the countervailing spread effects of
expansionary momentum are so very much weaker.
   To begin with, differences in legislation, administration and
mores generally, in language, in basic valuations and beliefs, in levels
                                  54
                   International Inequalities
of living, production capacities and facilities, make national bound-
aries much more effective barriers to the spread of expansionary
momentum than any demarcation lines within one country can be.
  Even more important as impediments to the spread effects of
expansionary momentum from abroad than the boundaries and
everything they stand for are the very facts of great poverty and
weak spread effects within the under-developed countries them-
selves.   When,   for instance,   international   trade and shipping
make the immediate surroundings of a port a centre of economic
expansion, which happens almost everywhere in the world, the
expansionary momentum does not usually spread out to other
regions of the country. Basically, the weak spread effects as between
countries are thus for the larger part only a reflection of the weak
spread effects within the under-developed countries themselves
caused by their low level of development attained.
   In these circumstances market forces will tend cumulatively to
accentuate international inequalities.

The Economic Impact of Colonialism
    Many of the under-developed countries were until recently
under the political domination of a metropolitan power, and some
still are. In addition, almost all those under-developed countries
which were not colonies were, and many still are, economically
dominated from abroad with effects in the economic field which
closely resemble those in the colonies themselves.
    In judging the economic results of colonialism and foreign
economic domination, I think it would contribute to avoiding an
irrational heightening of the resentments of these nations, if the
main thesis of this book were constantly borne in mind: namely
that because of circular causation a tendency towards inequality is
inherent in the unhampered play of market forces, and parti-
cularly so when the general level of development is low. Nationally,
once a country has reached a higher average level of economic
development, this tendency will be offset by the spread effects of
expansionary momentum and by national integration policies.
Internationally, for reasons just given, the spread effects are much
                                  aD
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
weaker and the cumulative process will more easily go in the
direction of inequality, if the forces in the market are given their
free play.
   If the businessmen and governments of colonial powers try to
hang on to the commercial advantages of this tendency of the play
of the market forces, and also of the political and economic power
position inherent in colonialism, this is not because of sinister
design on their part. It only means that they accept the world as
it is, take care of their interests, and “play the game” as long as it
pays, i.e. think and act in the way good and responsible people can
be expected to do.
   This should not be implied to mean that the behaviour of the
metropolitan countries and their businessmen has always and
necessarily been to the disadvantage of the dependent countries.
Ina real sense the economic activities of the colonisers represented a
measure of spread of economic expansion which without the peculiar
power relations of colonialism would not have taken place. Thailand,
which thanks to jealousies between the colonial powers was left in
political independence, did not become more developed than Burma.
   The colonial governments built roads, ports, railways, etc.—or
provided conditions of political security and economic profitability
without which they would not have been built by private business
concerns. Even when, as was usually the case, these enterprises
were motivated primarily by the colonial governments’ own
interests and those of their settlers and business groups, they
represented important advances towards creating the conditions
for general economic development.
   The colonial governments established law and order and a
regular civil service, took measures for elementary sanitation and,
in some cases, for popular and higher education on a limited scale.
These beneficial activities of colonial governments and _ their
business people were on a larger scale where political domination
was more completely institutionalised and endured for a consider-
able time, as in India or even Indonesia, while they were of smaller
consequence where the domination was less complete and durable,
as in the Middle East.
                              56
                   International Inequalities
   More generally, colonialism implied contacts with the ideas and
ideals of the world of the advanced countries. It conferred also
higher education and training for administrative and professional
responsibility to some, though to an extent differing greatly as
between the several colonial empires.
   Those former colonies that are now branching out on their own
course as independent states have this heritage as a basis for their
policies, including their economic development policies. But
during the time of dependence, these positive accomplishments
showed a persistent tendency not to result in much economic
development even if, in most cases, the colonies probably developed
further than if they had been left alone. To explain this we have
to reach down to the mechanism of circular causation in the play
of the various forces.

The Play of the Forces
  A metropolitan country had, of course, an interest in using the
dependent country as a market for the products of its own manu-
facturing industry. If it took special measures to hamper the
growth of indigenous industry—which often happened—this was
a natural commercial policy of a country which had political
domination over another country. Usually such measures, how-
ever, were not necessary, as in the absence of protective duties—
which the colony was not permitted to impose—the home industry
could easily undersell any colonial competitors.
   Likewise, the metropolitan country had a clear and obvious
interest in procuring primary goods from its dependent territory,
and even in investing so as to produce them in plenty and at low
cost, thereby exploiting in its own interest local natural resources
and indigenous cheap labour.
   A metropolitan country had also a self-evident interest in mono-
polising the dependent country as far as possible for its own
business interests, both as an export and an import market.      Its
control of trade and payments policy provided a ready means of
securing preferential treatment for them. But in a natural and
normal way it got the protection of its monopolistic interests
                                 57
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
fortified even more by the whole structure of legislation and
administration, and the entrenched institutional system of business
connections which was gradually built up. “Enforced bilateral-
ism”, as I have called this phenomenon in another connection,
characterised all colonial empires, though in different degrees.
It was a natural result of political and economic dependency, and
it now tends to retain its hold even after political liberation.
    In the metropolitan countries this bilateral tendency was often
idealised as ‘‘close cultural and economic ties” to a mother
country. And, as I said, there were very substantial advantages
to the dependent country connected with it. But at the end of the
process it must normally mean a considerable economic disadvan-
tage to the dependent country, as it tends to worsen its terms of
trade by restricting artificially the scope of the markets where it
buys and sells.
    It gives an interesting sidelight on the power situation in the
 world up till recently to note, in passing, that when occasionally
 this enforced bi-lateralism was challenged, it was not usually by
 the dependent countries themselves, but by other industrially
 developed countries which demanded open access to their markets
 as sources of raw materials, and as outlets for their exports of
 manufactured goods.
    The capital, enterprise and skilled labour a metropolitan
 country sent to a dependent country tended for natural reasons to
 form enclaves, cut out and isolated from the surrounding economy
 but tied to the economy of the home country. Their economic
 relations with the indigenous populations were restricted to their
 employment as unskilled labour. Racial and cultural differences,
 and the very much lower level of wages and modes of living made
 strict segregation a natural consequence even within the enclaves
 themselves.
    Segregation hampered the transfer of culture, including tech-
 nical skills and the spirit of enterprise, to the indigenous popula-
 tion. It is one of the main reasons why these economic starts of
 colonialism remained enclaves, and why the spread of expansion-
 ary momentum was extremely weak or altogether absent.
                                 58
                   International Inequalities
   When employment opportunities were expanded in the mines
and on the plantations, the new demand for labour was rapidly
filled by population increase, which was also spurred on by the
unquestionably beneficial policies, referred to above, of preserving
internal order and peace and improving sanitation. As the colon-
isers had an interest in a plentiful labour supply and low wages
for their enclaves, they were not likely to be disturbed by a rapid
population increase and lack of real development in the much
larger agricultural subsistence economy outside.
   A main interest of a metropolitan country was order and social
stability. By an almost automatic logic it therefore regularly came
to ally itself with the privileged classes in the dependent country;
sometimes such classes were created for this purpose. These
favoured groups were, by and large, primarily interested in pre-
serving the social and economic status quo under which they were
privileged, and they would not normally press either for a national
integration policy aimed at greater equality within the country, or
for progressive economic development in the main subsistence
sector of the economy.
   From one point of view, the most important effect of colonialism
was related to the negative fact that the colony was deprived of
effective nationhood, and had no government of its own which
could feel an urge to take constructive measures to promote the
balanced growth of a national economy. True, in most cases it
was only the fermenting influences of the changes brought into the
colony by the activity of the colonisers which had gradually
brought into existence a situation where such aspirations could be
in any degree realistic and reasonable. At that stage, however,
lack of political independence meant the absence of a unifying and
integrating purpose for the community—except, at a still later
stage, the negative aim of expelling the foreign rulers.
   The country and the people were laid bare and defenceless to
the play of the market forces as redirected only by the interests of
the foreign metropolitan power. This by itself thwarted individual
initiatives, at the same time as it prevented the formation of a
public policy motivated by the common interests of the people.
                                  =)
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
   For all these reasons, colonialism meant primarily only a
strengthening of all the forces in the markets which anyhow were
working towards internal and international inequalities. It built
itself into, and gave an extra impetus and a peculiar character to,
the circular causation of the cumulative process.
   It had—and in some countries still has, not least in the depen-
dent countries themselves—its close parallels in certain institu-
tional power structures within individual countries: the caste
system, racial and religious chasms, the dependence of the rural
regions upon the richer city and, in the feudal or semi-feudal
order, the dependence of the peasants upon the landlord, the
merchant, the moneylender or the tax collector.
   Such hardened institutions of inequality are inimical to econo-
mic progress in individual under-developed countries. If they
hamper the spread effects within those countries, they inhibit, at
the same time, the spread of expansionary momentum from the
advanced countries abroad. As I have also mentioned, they have
offered to the metropolitan governments a power basis for main-
taining colonialism and, in fact, have been promoted by those
governments. In these intimate ways internal and international
inequalities are inextricably woven together by mutual causation
in a circular fashion.

 The Colonial System under Liquidation
   In the era of awakened nationalism in the under-developed
world the colonial system is now doomed, and its liquidation is one
of the most important political avalanches taking place before our
eyes. ‘The remnants of the system are bound to disintegrate within
a period of time which is very short in the annals of history.
   The new nationalism is always, in a sense and to a degree,
“democratic” and, in any case, the old alliances with privileged
groups interested in the status quo do not any longer assure social
peace. In the dependencies which still linger, the military and
other expenses needed to maintain the régime, the costs and losses
caused by popular revolts, and the financial burden of necessary
social reforms and investments in economic development, take
                                60
                    International Inequalities
the profitability out of the colonial system and make it instead
increasingly a liability to the metropolitan countries.
   Even when in a particular case development has reached a stage
where the clear national interest is to get out as smoothly and
rapidly as possible, there are, of course, special vested interests in
the metropolitan countries, sometimes able to infect whole political
factions in their parliaments. The settlers and business corpora-
tions, who have profits, investments and a whole way of life to lose,
will also resist giving up their privileges.
   The ideas about this system as a vehicle for a national “‘civilising
mission” in history, which under the epoch of colonialism had
emerged and become a part of the ideological structures and
phraseologies of the different metropolitan countries, will for a
considerable time be earnestly upheld by writers, statesmen and
the common    citizens.   Fundamentally, these ideas are, however,
largely rationalisations of economic interests.
   When the profitability of the system is gradually lost and it
stands out as an increasingly expensive political luxury, the colonial
system is doomed and the national ideologies will be readjusted
accordingly. The intellectual leaders in the great humanistic
tradition in these countries will instead be increasingly concerned
with the practical problem of how the liquidation of the colonial
system can be so handled with wisdom and foresight as to cause a
minimum of incidental human suffering, and in any case to avoid
tragedies on a large scale.

The Heritage from Colonialism
  When a poor and backward nation becomes politically inde-
pendent, it will find out, even if it did not know before, that
political independence most certainly does not mean that it is
automatically on the road to economic development. It will still
be up against cumulative social processes holding it down in
stagnation or regression: the ‘‘natural’’ play of the forces in the
markets will be working all the time to increase internal and
international inequalities as long as its general level of development
is low.
                                  61
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
   It inherits a large subsistence economy and, in addition, en-
claves producing primary goods for export. To be able to import
the capital goods it urgently needs for economic development it
will have to press on with this production for export along the
established lines. The “enforced bi-lateralism’ is firmly en-
trenched in the whole business set-up. It can only gradually be
transferred into a more profitable system of many-sided business
relations with the markets of the whole world. As the new govern-
ment cannot offer the security of political colonialism it will
initially have greater difficulty in attracting foreign entrepreneurs
and funds from the international capital market.
   The one great asset its liberation from colonial domination will
have bestowed on it, is its liberty to regulate its life according to
the interests of its own people. And this new asset, its freedom to
interfere with the play of the forces in the markets, will not be
remunerative, unless put to use intelligently and firmly. This
problem I shall touch on in the next two chapters.
   Meanwhile, the very struggle for independence has in many
cases released spiritual forces for national identification—the
necessary first condition for a nation’s ability to conceive a national
development plan. India is, of course, an outstanding example
of this birth of a nation through the fight for independence.
   Libya, on the other hand—which obtained its freedom by a
decision of the United Nations as an incidental result of the defeat
of fascist Italy in the Second World War—and several countries
in the Middle East—which owe their existence as separate states
mainly to the balancing jealousies of the West-European colonial
powers when carving up the Ottoman empire after the First World
War, and whose      boundaries   are artificial for the same    reason
—demonstrate the weaknesses consequent on having won nation-
hood too haphazardly.
   It is in this connection that the broadly educational influences
from the countries which have successfully established their new
nationhood, and begun to form national policies, become so im-
portant for the less fortunate ones. It can be observed how during
the last ten years the liberation of so many colonial countries
                                62
                   International Inequalities
and their vehement craving, and sometimes active planning, for
national economic development has, so to speak by contagion,
inspired to new national policy exertions also those under-
developed countries, notably in Latin America, which had long
been politically independent though often in the bonds of economic
domination from abroad.

The Absence of a World State
   It is here appropriate to recall that in the developed countries
regional inequalities have been mitigated, and in a few of the
richest and most advanced ones almost wiped out of existence by
the spread of expansionary momentum and by policy interferences
on the part of the national state. The world as a whole shows,
however, an appearance which is more similar to the internal
situation in one of the least developed countries, where the spread
effects are weak and where the state has been less able to counter-
act by its intentional policy interferences the backwash effects of
the play of the market forces directed towards inequality.
   The international situation is all the worse and more hopeless,
because we have hardly more than the faintest beginnings of any-
thing like an international authority to perform for the world as a
whole the task of the national state in an individual country. If
from one point of view the explanation of the existing and ever
increasing international inequalities is the cumulative tendency
inherent in the unhampered play of market forces in a situation
where the effectiveness of the spread effects is weak, from another
point of view the explanation is the absence of a world state which
could interfere in the interest of equality of opportunity.
   On a deeper level, the explanation is that there does not exist
for mankind as a whole that psychological basis upon which such a
policy could be founded: the basis of mutual human solidarity.
There is nothing on a world scale corresponding to the state of
mind within a nation, built upon a certain homogeneity of culture
in all regions and social classes and usually, though not always,
strengthened by a common language and religion and the concept
of racial oneness, which has evolved from a long history of common
                                63
       Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
destiny, and has developed continuously in the advanced countries
to ever higher levels by the very experience of sharing responsibility
for the national integration policy itself.
   During and immediately after the Second World War courage-
ous attempts were made to build up inter-governmental organisa-
tions in many fields for the explicit purpose of initiating policies
of international economic integration. This activity was born out
of the sufferings and anxieties during the war. All felt that the
world had to be remade.
   The results of these strivings are small indeed, measured in
terms of the hopes once held out to the peoples; but the efforts still
continue. And they will continue, because international integra-
tion and equality are ideals which no country, and indeed no
responsible human being, can ever afford to give up. Inter-
governmental organisations, therefore, once they have come into
existence, however ineffective they become, will never be liquidated
in peace time. They are in that sense among the most stable of
human institutions.   If for no other reason, we need them to con-
sole our international conscience.
   Many of these organisations are as yet, in the main, only pro-
paganda forums, and, in addition, media for consultation and for
diplomatic contacts between governments. Some produce studies
of importance to the learned professions and to individual govern-
ments. Some also succeed in arranging co-operation between
governments in minor technical matters.
   The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
lends money, and some of this capital stream is directed towards
the under-developed countries—very small sums, to be sure, in
some cases probably less than the capital some of these countries
lose through capital flights or by the gradual repatriation of invest-
ments after their political liberation. Most of the international
organisations are active in technical assistance, again on a very
small scale. There are possibilities that an international institution
will be founded for distributing capital aid, though in very small,
little more than symbolic, portions. SUNFED—the Special
United Nations Fund for Economic Development—is important
                                 64
                    International Inequalities
as an ideal, long before it has been agreed upon between the
powers.
   Meanwhile under-developed countries are utilising the inter-
national organisations as places where demands can be raised for
international action to improve their terms of trade and counteract
the disastrous fluctuations in their export returns. But it is im-
probable that practical agreements on an important scale will soon
be reached in this field. The idea of an international control of
industrial cartels is also being quietly buried.
   If the practical results are thus as yet meagre or altogether
absent, nevertheless it is of the greatest importance that there now
exist international forums where the under-privileged countries
can raise their demands for equality of opportunity and express
their dissatisfaction with the operation of market forces. Even if
present signs are discouraging, the time may come when the begin-
nings of a world government present in our existing international
organisations can be gradually strengthened to function in ways
more and more similar to those of the individual national states
within their own boundaries.
   We should not forget that as recently as just before the Second
World War hardly any responsible scholar or statesman would
have dreamt of the feasibility of that approach to international
taxation on a small scale which the United Nations’ technical
assistance programme actually represents.
   The judgment holds, however, that in the foreseeable future the
corrective policies initiated by inter-governmental organisations
will amount to very little—to very much less than the effects of the
changes, upwards and downwards, in the under-developed coun-
tries’ terms of trade which can be expected to occur from year to year.
    In this situation the under-developed countries are mainly
thrown back on their own resources. Their situation is not entirely
hopeless. Even in the absence of a world state which could inter-
fere with the play of market forces in the interest of greater equality,
 they are now becoming masters over their own economy and can
 even regulate international trade insofar as their own exports and
 imports are concerned.
                                   65
                               CHAPTER       6

            NATIONAL STATE POLICIES
         IN UNDER-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES}?

Rising Nationalism
   Under-developed countries, utilising their newly won inde-
pendent status, can by purposive policy interferences manage to
alter considerably the direction of the market processes under the
impact of which they have hitherto remained backward. The
cumulative nature of these processes, which has pressed them
down, holds out, on the other hand, the promise of high returns
from their policy efforts, if they manage to plan them intelligently
and carry them out effectively. This, however, is a very big “‘if”’.
   From that point of view, the political independence they have
won for themselves, or are now winning, is their most precious
asset. It gives them freedom to organise their own life according
to their own     interests.   In the absence      of a world     state, their
policies have to be nationalistic in the sense of being directed with a
single-minded intensity to raising their own economic standards
and reaching greater equality of opportunity with the rest of the
world.   It is not up to them, who are the poor, to take into account
international considerations, except those that are also in their own
interest. The richer countries are not making many real sacrifices
either, though in their case it would be in line with the ideals of
liberty and equality.
   Economic nationalism does not need to be preached to the newly
liberated under-developed countries. Nationalism, as I have
suggested, has an important function to fulfil in welding together
the masses and inspiring them to a common purpose and a unified
policy, and this becomes even more important in the virtual
   1'This chapter, as the rest of the book, was completed before Egypt’s
nationalisation of the Suez Canal and the sequence of international crises that
were released by that event. I have not found reasons to make any material
changes in the text.
                                      66
                     National State Policies
absence of a functioning world community. But I feel a special
responsibility to add the reminder that an economic policy does
not become rational simply because it appeals to national feelings,
still less because it might be damaging to other nations. It is the
more important to stress this as for natural reasons nationalism
in the under-privileged countries contains not only positive urges
towards growth and welfare at home, but also much resentment
against those richer countries which have until recently been
using power to hold in check their national aspirations.
    There is a simple rule to apply in drawing the line for sane and
sound nationalism: an under-developed country is well advised to
take any and all measures which, on the ground of good reasoning,
can be proved to enhance its own economic welfare, but it should
carefully avoid policy measures which are not nationally beneficial
in their total and ultimate effects. And culturally it has reasons for
learning from all the world. It is a policy of defeatism, which a
poor country least of all can afford, to build up barriers against the
richer world’s civilisation and values.
    I give this advice to rational nationalism with a clear conscience,
as it is my conviction that real success in the under-developed
countries’ nationalist economic policies would bring us nearer, and
not further away from, the stage when an integrated world policy,
based on international solidarity, could be effectively attempted.
It is poverty itself which keeps levels of culture in the under-
developed countries low. And, whether we like it or not, solidarity
is not a state of mind nurtured by condescending compassion for
those who are different from oneself; it develops naturally between
equals and near-equals.
    It is not the downtrodden Negro in America who overcomes
white prejudices and inspires a natural acceptance of his equal
human rights but the educated, prosperous and secure           Negro—he
is more effectively the fighting Negro. It is when the workers in
our advanced countries have won and fortified their right to strike
that they can enter into collective bargaining on equal terms—and
strikes can then become rare occurrences.
    Land reforms were seldom handed down by public-spirited
                                  67
        Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
landlords on their own benevolent initiative, but were pressed upon
them by the dissatisfaction of land-hungry peasants. And today in
our advanced countries the present agricultural price policies have
been won as the result of the political power the farmers exert.
In the absence of this power the countryside in most of these
countries would for long periods have been more poverty-stricken
and backward.1
   Similarly, between nations it is fundamentally a question of
achieving a more equal balance of power. All my observations of
the functioning of our international organisations have brought
me to the conclusion that the main cause of their weakness in the
present historical stage is international inequality and, more
specifically, the exceedingly weak bargaining power of the under-
developed countries, which formally constitute their majorities,
though in reality they are dominated by the tiny minority of rich
and powerful countries.

Growth of Solidarity between the Under-privileged Nations
   From this point of view—to attain a world situation where there
would be more of a democratic power balance and thus a stronger
basis of solidarity for concerted international action—every
development towards solidarity between the under-privileged
countries is also a step forward, insofar as this means that they
become stronger.
   Under-developed countries tend to have their main cultural and
economic relations and, in fact, most of their communications with
one or several industrial countries, while their mutual ties are
  1 Some of these political advantages won by the under-privileged groups in
advanced countries are at the expense of still more under-privileged peoples in
under-developed countries.    This is an example of the fact that, in the absence       _
of a world state, the nations as integrated entities, including their less privileged
groups, become interested participants in joint policies which from a broader
point of view work towards international inequality and exploitation.
   The peoples of Cuba and Java could be a little better off if we in Europe were
to waste less labour in growing sugar beet. By protecting our farmers’ butter
we are giving less of a chance to the producers of the raw materials for manu-
facturing margarine. The Egyptians cannot be very happy about the United
States’ way of supporting their cotton growers.
   But this does not contradict the point made in the text, where I am simply
illustrating how on the national scene solidarity must be based on some equality
of political power.
                                         68
                    National State Policies
weak. This is, indeed, a natural outcome of prolonged economic
and cultural backwardness, foreign economic domination and, in
particular, political colonialism.
   It has its approximate parallel in the paucity of close inter-
relations within a subjugated class of families and individuals of
many static societies, concomitant with the development of fixed
client-patron relations to individual members or families of the
dominating class. As in such a society, so in the world at large, the
under-privileged group has to seek its liberation partly by cultivat-
ing its own inter-relations. By joining hands and pooling what they
have of bargaining power, the under-developed countries can
together gain for themselves consideration which they could not
have got individually.
   As yet, there is almost no practical economic co-operation
between under-developed countries, and the basis for fostering it
is weak, as the initial situation is an almost complete absence of
economic relations and often of effective transport facilities. But
on the more general political plane there is under way a developing
solidarity among the under-developed countries which is bound to
become in time one of the great forces of history. ‘They have in
common their memory of foreign domination and exploitation, an
intense realisation of poverty and international inequality, and the
ambition to rise to fuller participation in the enjoyment of the
world’s opportunities.
   Their collective support of all liberation movements in the still
dependent countries is already a political reality of considerable
significance. In their internal policies they are beginning to learn
from each others’ experiences, and are not taking all their patterns
from the developed countries. In time, practical economic co-
operation within this group will also develop.
   As international solidarity grows between the great majority of
mankind which is struggling along in the under-developed coun-
tries, the minority of people in the developed countries will feel
compelled to join by careful steps the majority, which is becoming
powerful, in arriving at common policies for common goals.
  This is how, in favourable circumstances,      I could see world
                                 69
       Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
 solidarity coming to us and the gradual emergence of a likeness of,
 or an approach to, the world state. Benevolence on the part of the
 richer countries will in this respect be a secondary factor—for the
 simple reason that, except under the urge of some compulsion,
 our advanced nations are not prepared to give up privileges and
 make sacrifices for the poorer countries.
    No society has ever substantially reformed itself by a movement
 from above, or by a simple voluntary decision of an upper class,
 springing from its social conscience, to become equal with the
 lower classes and to give them free entrance to the class monopolies.
 Ideals and social conscience do play their very considerable role,
 which should not be forgotten; but they are weak as self-propelled
 forces, originating reforms on a large scale—they need the pull of
‘demands being raised and pressed for.
    When power has been assembled by those who have grievances,
 then is the time when ideals and the social conscience can become
 effective.

The Rich and the Poor Countries Moving Apart
   To speak in Hegelian terms: the road to international integration
must be sought through national integration. ‘The adoption of
nationalist policies by the poor countries and an increase of their
bargaining power, as a result of these policies and of increased
co-operation between them as a group, are a necessary stage in the
development of more effective world-wide international co-
operation.
   The English have, as very often, a simple and colloquial expres-
sion for this learned thought: things must get worse before they
can get better. As a matter of fact, the national integration which ~
has already taken place in the rich and highly developed countries
has itself caused much international disintegration. The approach
to national integration in the under-developed countries will like-
 wise, in the first instance, increase international tension.   Only as
 a perspective into the future can we discern the possibility that the
 then internally better organised countries may also find the way to
 closer international co-operation.
                                   70
                      National State Policies
   This, however, represents only a possibility and a desirable goal
to strive for. Another and less fortunate possibility, which cannot
be ruled out, would be that political tension should continue to
grow between the two classes of nations indefinitely, as the lower
class nations become more consolidated and at the same time
more conscious of their grievances, while this very development
might swell the defensive attitude of the nations in the upper class.
   Indeed, as the rich and economically progressive nations are now
facing the strivings of the poor and under-developed ones for
economic development, the easiest manner of using their powers
can be specified in a number of negatives. They can decline, and
they do decline, capital aid in any considerable quantity. They can
refuse, and they do refuse, to participate in inter-governmental
actions for stabilisation of the under-developed countries’ export
prices, for control over international cartels in the industrial field
and in shipping, and for all the other good causes to which their
economists and statesmen committed their nations during the
Second World War and immediately afterwards.
   As the major contributors to the budgets of the international
organisations the richer countries can keep down, and they do
keep down, these budgets and thereby prevent these organisations
from being effective in promoting the concerted actions for which
they were created. By their budget controls, by their relative
monopoly of expertise in most fields, and by their greater influence
with the directing officials of the international organisations and,
indeed, upon their selection and appointment, they can prevent
dangerous initiatives from being taken and studies from being
carried out which would challenge the status quo. As an analysis
of the output of international organisations, particularly in the
economic field, would show, the efforts to make them more and
more innocuous have usually been successful.
  These negative policies correspond to natural tendencies in
those nations which are better off, and which therefore have vested
interests in preserving the status quo. Why should they undertake
sacrifices?   True, sacrifices can be motivated in the interest of the
welfare of the poor people living in the under-developed countries.
                                   71
       Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
And it can also be argued that they would be conducive to inter-
national integration, and in line with ideals and even with the long-
range national interests of the richer countries as well. But for
that type of policy, both the psychological solidarity basis among
the peoples and the imagination and daring among their political
leaders are largely lacking.
   At the same time, in their strivings for national integration the
under-developed countries are bound to take a number of steps
which discourage the richer countries from any other policies than
the negative ones referred to above. In their turn the negative
policies of the richer countries compel the under-developed
countries to take more such steps and also encourage them to be
less considerate towards the richer countries in their national
integration policies. Again we are facing a situation of circular
causation having cumulative effects.
   In fact, the national economic policies of the under-developed
countries must, to a large extent, particularly in the early stages, be
directed against those of the richer countries with whom they have
traditionally enjoyed the closest economic relations. For these
relations represented colonial or quasi-colonial dependence which
must be ended. And this, of course, goes against the interests of
the countries which had privileges that must now be taken away
from them.
   A great number of long-established international economic
relations have to be broken in this process. In many cases, an
under-developed country will want to nationalise the foreign-
owned installations for exploitation of its natural resources. The
reasons for a particular policy step in this process of national
economic liberation may be strong or weak, sound or unsound.
In any case, one effect will almost of necessity be a lessening of
international confidence in capital investments in under-developed
countries and, indeed, confidence in business relations generally
with such countries.
   I have already noted that, to some extent, growing nationalism
is both desirable and necessary in under-developed countries. In
their efforts to lift the peoples living there out of apathy and
                                 72
                     National State Policies
frustration, caused by centuries of economic and cultural stagna-
tion, and to mould them into national social entities, without which
no development is possible, political leaders simply have to use
appeals to nationalistic feelings.
   And such appeals are usually also very effective. Most under-
developed countries lack political traditions, stable administra-
tion, and an educated citizenry. In many of these countries the
peoples are steeped in racial and religious emotionalism. As their
inhabitants become conscious of grievances, the nationalistic
feelings can easily develop to an intensity which is beyond any
rational justification. And to foment these feelings is often the
most effective means, and sometimes the only means, of acquiring
and keeping political power, which is the first obligation of every
politician.
   The effect may easily be that the political leaders are virtually
compelled to take policy steps against foreign interests, which are
not motivated by their country’s true development interests, but
only by the intense nationalistic feelings of the people which the
leaders have to cater to. And in this very process these feelings are
usually prodded towards new heights of intensity. The policy
steps and their emotional causation must, in their turn, tend to
move the developed countries into still more negative positions.
And so, by circular causation, the political gap between the rich
and the poor nations may cumulatively widen.

The Powers of the Poor
  The richer countries can use, and are using, their powers of
inaction: not to aid, not to get capital to move, not to permit
international organisations to become effective in preparing for
concerted action in the interests of the under-developed countries.
  And, of course, they also have recourse to bribes.     If the term
“bribe” is taken in a wider and not juridical meaning, many
essential elements in the old colonial system were in the nature of
bribes to individuals and social groups. Attempts in the post-war
world to give economic aid with attached political conditions be-
long to the same category. On the whole, and judging them by
                                  a3
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
their probable more permanent effects, such attempts have not
been very successful. ‘The end result seems most often to be an
increase in popular resentment.
   The under-developed countries are weak militarily, financially
and commercially. Indeed, I have repeatedly referred to their
weak bargaining power as one of the fundamental elements of
imbalance in the world. In this situation it should not surprise
us to find poor countries occasionally using that element of real
political power which consists in their being capable of making
themselves a nuisance of some sort or another, or threatening to
do so.
   In the “oppressor state”, before there was any effectively
functioning political democracy, to make a nuisance of himself was
always the ultimate defence of the poor man. Thomas Hobbes
pointed out that, while any person’s actual possibilities of doing
good were always severely limited, everyone’s opportunity to do
damage was always immense. On this principle the dissatisfied
members of the world community have available blackmailing
powers which they will increasingly learn to use to their own advan-
tage, as they rise to national unity out of the long ages of apathy,
social chasms, and local isolation.
   In many cases the people in an under-developed country feel
that they have been so maltreated by the world as a whole, or by a
particular country among the richer ones, that they consider
themselves right and just in using all political means at their
disposal. Emotional nationalism will usually provide what would
lack in rational motivation for feeling self-righteous. And the old
cynical idea that any policy which pays is thereby justified has, of
course, been spread effectively to the under-developed countries
through centuries of Western colonialism, which in regard to the
means employed was never much restrained by moral considera-
tions.
   The danger that under-developed countries will increasingly
resort to blackmail will naturally be greater the more the richer
countries’ approach to their development problems remains nega-
tive. Only insofar as we could make real advances towards world
                                  74
                    National State Policies
democracy—implying a growth of international solidarity on the
part of the richer nations, and a rising trend of international
co-operation to equalise opportunities—can we hope that in the
longer range the politicians of under-developed countries will feel
that they can abstain from using their powers of blackmailing
the richer countries. On the other hand, it is equally apparent
that nothing can more effectively consolidate those countries in
their negative attitudes than a few flagrant cases of such black-
mail. Again, we are up against the principle of circular causation
having cumulative effects.
   Meanwhile, we are rapidly approaching an era where the richer
countries are no longer in a position to use their superior military
strength for controlling countries with relatively less military
power which, on the whole, are also the under-privileged and
dissatisfied ones. This big change works undoubtedly towards a
more even balance of power in the world. It has not been brought
about through the international organisations: it is, indeed, not at
all the result of purposive policy but of the blind forces of the
technical development. In the atomic age, the use of force in
international relations is becoming increasingly unpopular among
common people in all countries, and particularly in the richer
countries where the inhabitants have most to lose by conflicts.
People there are wary of any action which involves the danger of a
world conflagration.
   If one of the richer and militarily more powerful countries in
a critical situation tries to back up its pressure upon an under-
developed country to act in a certain way by flagging a threat to
use force, this will nowadays usually prove to be an ineffective
gesture, a bluff which will be called. It may then backfire. It can
easily break up whatever of solidarity among the richer countries
there might have existed over the issue at stake. At the same time,
nothing can be a more powerful urge for the under-privileged
nations to close their ranks than such a threat.
   And every time a threat is made and not followed up by action,
something of the magic of power is permanently lost. The use of
threats will then be still less effective in the future. But without
                                Phe:
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
the threat of force the ultimatums of even big powers lack sub-
stance. This development awards tactical advantages to the
poorer countries with relatively less military power, particularly
if they are a little more reckless than is the average standard in the
world.
   The dilemma facing the richer countries becomes evident in the
event that the government of one of them decides really to use its
military superiority. It will then most likely find world opinion
mobilised against it, and will usually also cause a dangerous split
within its own nation. Apart from whatever short-term arrange-
ments in its favour a government might be able to press through
by use of force, a certain and permanent result will be the negative
one of having consolidated against itself the resistance and hatred
of the poorer nations.
    The time has passed long ago when under-developed nations
could be policed by demonstrations of military power into con-
forming to the wishes of the richer ones—and this is so, inde-
pendently of what would be rational from a world point of view or
corresponding to the legal status quo.

A Moral Element
   In the rich and highly developed countries there is also always
present, as one strand of opinion among others, anti-imperialist
feelings and, more generally, feelings of sympathy for the under-
dog. As I shall point out in Chapter 9, such generous feelings are
strongly based in the inherited ethos of Western civilisation.
   These attitudes are present even in the old colonial countries in
Western Europe, and in the British ‘‘white’” dominions which,
unlike the United States, have never had to fight for their national
freedom. They are, naturally, somewhat more prevalent in coun-
tries which have lost their colonial empires—Germany, Italy and
now, in the main, the Netherlands—and also in the non-colonial
countries in Scandinavia, though there they are usually held back
by bonds of interest solidarity with the colonial powers and,
even more, by a heavy fog of opportunistic ignorance and non-
concernedness.   Nevertheless, in all the richer countries there are
                                    76
                     National State Policies
usually enough of these generous attitudes to make it difficult or
impossible to preserve a common front against an under-developed
country which transgresses the interests of one or more of the
richer countries.
   For many reasons anti-colonialism and a sympathy for the
poorer nations are much stronger in the United States of America
than anywhere else in the richer countries, either in Western
Europe or in the “white” British dominions. In Europe and still
more in the under-developed parts of the world I have observed
that ordinary people and also politicians, have no real appreciation
of how important this trait in American culture is and, more parti-
cularly, how severely in practice it limits the ability of the United
States’ government to support the old colonial powers in Western
Europe who are its political allies.
   The average American citizen is apt to suspect the motives of
those powers in their dealings with political dependencies or
former dependencies. Were it not for all the complicated tactical
interests involved in carrying on a cold war by means of a great
number of diverse and often fragile alliances, the United States
would come out even more often, and more bluntly, on the side
of the poorer countries. In particular it would back the liberation
movements in the countries which are still political dependencies.
   From the viewpoint of its allies among the colonial powers, the
United States actually does this often enough to cause their dis-
satisfaction. The Dutch blamed the United States for the libera-
tion of Indonesia. When more recently the Indonesians repudiated
their financial obligations to the Netherlands, many Dutchmen
again felt that the United States carried the ultimate responsibility,
as in their view a sterner line of policy in Washington towards the
newly liberated countries would have prevented it. Australians
feel bitter against the Americans for having encouraged the people
in West Guinea to dream of political independence, and to ask for a
definite timetable for its realisation. And on many occasions in
recent years French journalists and politicians have alternatively
accused the Americans and the Russians of instigating the Arabs
in North Africa to rebellion.
                                 77
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
   On a still deeper level than the attitudes which are in the tradi-
tion of anti-colonialism, is a widespread vague consciousness in
all the richer nations that the misery in the poorer countries carries
an element of injustice and moral wrongfulness, and that it holds
some unknown, stupendous and ominous menace to their own
security. To an extent, this ties the hands of politicians in the
richer countries who wish to administer reprisals against an
under-developed country.

Relevance of the Soviet Orbit
   In the Preface it was stated that the exposition in this book
refers only to the non-Soviet world. This abstract assumption
has, however, no real significance for the analysis contained in
Chapters 1 to 5. Even the liquidation of the colonial system and
the absence of a world state, discussed in Chapter 5, are things
which have their main causes outside the Soviet orbit. Neither is
the abstraction relevant for the treatment in the next chapter of
certain general problems related to economic planning. The
problems of the national policies of under-developed countries
dealt with in this chapter and, in particular, of the development of
the relations between the two classes of nations in the non-Soviet
world do, however, definitely depend also upon what happens with-
in the Soviet orbit and upon the consequences of those happenings
on the political and economic relations to the rest of the world,
and to the under-developed nations in particular.
   The momentous changes in both respects which after Stalin’s
death are taking place faster than ever should, therefore, rightly be
taken up at this stage of our argument. The question should be
asked what significance they will have for the problems of under-
developed countries. If we stop our analysis at this point without
attempting to answer this question, the implication is that, while in
earlier chapters we could arrive at a closed system of definite
conclusions, the present chapter will have to end with some huge
question marks.



                                 78
                             CHAPTER     7

        NATIONAL ECONOMIC                    PLANNING
       IN UNDER-DEVELOPED                    COUNTRIES

Agreement on the Necessity of a State Plan
   The most important change in state policies in under-developed
countries is the common understanding that they should each and
all have a national economic development policy.
   Indeed it is also universally urged that each of them should have
an overall, integrated national plan. All under-developed countries
are now attempting to provide themselves with such a plan, except
a few that have not yet been reached by the Great Awakening.
   It is assumed by all that it is the state that must be responsible
both for initiating the overall plan and seeing that it is carried out.
From one point of view the plan is a programme for the strategy
of a national government in applying a system of state interferences
with the play of the market forces, thereby conditioning them in
such a way as to give an upward push to the social process.
   Because of the various deficiences in a backward country it is
also accepted by everybody that the government will have to take
over many functions which in most advanced countries in the
Western world are left to private business. In much of the con-
temporary literature on economic under-development and develop-
ment—and particularly in that larger part of it which is written in
the advanced countries—the matter is sometimes confused by an
altogether unfounded counter-position of central state planning and
“free enterprise’, and by assuming that planning creates rigidity.
   It should be clear, however, that, if an under-developed country
really succeeds in starting, and sustaining by its policy inter-
ferences, an upward cumulative process of economic development,
this will provide more and not less space for what of private enter-
prise such a country possesses or is able to foster. And the central
planning will constantly have to aim at breaking the rigidities,
                                  79
       Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
which are the mark of under-development, and to seek to establish
greater flexibility in the entire economic and social fabric.*
   But quite apart from the question where the line is drawn
between public and private responsibility—which is usually not a
question of principle, but of practical expedience—the national
government is expected to assume by means of the plan, and the
co-ordinated system of state interferences making up the opera-
tional part of it, responsibility for the direction of the entire
economic development of the country.
   The emergence in under-developed countries of this common
urge to economic development as a major political issue, and the
definition of economic development as a rise in the levels of living
of the common people, the agreement that economic development
is a task for governments and that governments must prepare and
enforce a general economic plan, containing a system of purpose-
fully applied controls and impulses to get development started
and to keep it going—all this amounts to something entirely new in
history. It represents, indeed, an attempt at a complete reversal of
what once happened in the now developed countries as described
by the Schumpeterian model.
   We see not only how this much more than half of mankind living
in poverty and distress begins to pursue on a grand scale a line of
policy where the state takes responsibility for economic develop-
ment, but that positive and urgent advice to do so is given to them
by all scholars and statesmen from the advanced countries, and by
their governments when participating in solemn resolutions of all
the inter-governmental organisations. Apparently nobody in the
advanced countries sees any other way out of the mounting
difficulties in under-developed countries, however different his
attitude may be towards economic problems at home.

Major Problems of State Planning
  A main purpose of every national development plan is to pro-
claim a decision to increase the total amount of investment aimed
   + Cf. United Nations, Economic Commission for Latin America, Analyses
and Projections of Economic Development, I. An Introduction to the Techniques
of Programming, New York, 1955, pp. 3 ff.
                                     80
                    National Economic Planning
 at raising the productive powers of the country, and to define the
  means by which this can be done.
    The plan must determine this overall amount and must, in
 addition, determine the proportions of the capital to be allocated
 in different directions: to increasing overall facilities in transport
 and power production; to constructing new plants and acquiring the
_machinery for heavy industries, and for light industries of various
 types; to raising the level of productivity in agriculture by long-term
 investment in irrigation schemes and short-term investment in
 tools, machinery and fertilisers; to improving the levels of health,
‘education and training of the working people, and so on.
    To be practical and effective, the plan must not only be a general
 scheme, but must have this adequately worked out in detailed
 directives by careful planning of the different sectors. And it must
 give instructions for the specific inducements and controls by
 which the realisation of those directives becomes effected.
    The plan should learn from the industrially advanced countries
 that national integration towards greater social mobility and regional
 economic equality is conducive to rapid and sustained economic
 growth in the country as a whole. A main purpose of the state
 policies blue-printed in the plan, therefore, must be to increase the
  strength of the spread effects of the development impulses as
  between regions and between occupations. In this respect most
  under-developed countries are up against outworn institutions of
  social and economic inequality which often cannot easily be broken.
| Frequently the state is itself initially in the hands of social
_ groups which have an interest in preserving the traditional social
  chasms.
     Breaking those social chasms and creating a psychological,
  ideological, social and political situation propitious to economic
  development become of paramount importance. Land reforms
  have their significance in the national plan not only as a pre-
  condition for raising productivity in agriculture, but primarily as a
  means of shattering the foundations of the old class structure of a
  stagnating society. Reforms in the field of health and education
  have also this double purpose of directly raising the productivity
                                   81
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
of the population and, at the same time, reconditioning individuals
and society so that rational motives become of greater consequence.
   To help social casualties—the sick, the maimed, the aged and,
even more important, the children—will certainly be important in
this general effort to strengthen rational incentives. But it has to
be done in an economic manner. A poor, under-developed country
cannot, in the early stages of its economic development, really
afford much of the type of redistributive measures which in the
advanced countries are known under the label “‘social security’.
They should consider carefully the fact that the now highly
developed countries in their early stages of their economic develop-
ment had very little of it, and that this type of equalising policy
came to play an important role only when the general level of
average income per head had risen high above what the under-
developed countries can hope for in the near future.
   They might also recall that the one-century-delayed industrial
revolution which has been taking place in the Soviet Union under
very different political and institutional conditions has closely
followed, in this one respect, the pattern of earlier capitalistic
development, in that the levels of real income and consumption of
the working masses were kept exceedingly low to allow for sus-
tained rapid capital formation.
   There is no other road to economic development than a com-
pulsory rise in the share of the national income which is withheld
from consumption and devoted to investment. This implies a
policy of the utmost austerity—quite independently of whether
the increased savings are engendered by high levels of profits to be
ploughed back in industrial expansion or by increased taxation.
   This frugality, which must be applied to the level of living of
the masses of the people for the simple reason that they are the
many, becomes a much more difficult policy in the under-developed
countries today than it ever was in the now highly developed ones
in their early stages of economic development. This is so both /
because of their much greater poverty and also because of the new }
ideology—which had no real counterpart in the earlier history of
the developed countries but has now been spread with their |
                                82
                    National Economic Planning
generous support—that the purpose of economic development is to
raise levels of living for the masses of the people.            |»
                                                                 :
  It becomes even more difficult, insofar as democratic forms of
government are being adopted, giving the vote to the masses.
“Tt is not easy in some parts of the world where life is exceedingly
primitive to entrust to all the people the power of democratic
selection, and then to ask them to forgo some immediate delights.
It is not easy.”1 In the advanced countries effective political
suffrage was restricted by various devices to the upper income
strata until late in the development process. That type of “‘re-
stricted democracy”’ has in our days lost its appeal.
   The under-developed countries have to go all the way to full
democracy with universal suffrage. ‘The alternative is to remain
legalised oligarchies—or, if the outer forms of democracy are
adopted, to dilute those forms. But as the inherited social strati-
fication in these countries has been shaped by the impact of long
periods of economic stagnation and is very uneven and very stale,
this will in most cases imply preserving social chasms inimical to
the strengthening of those centrifugal spread effects which are
necessary for sustained economic development. The inequality
which exists there, and is preserved, is not of the type to foster
enterprise, savings and investments. The analogy of what once
happened in the Industrial Revolution of the now advanced
countries is a false one.
   Under-developed countries thus need real democracy even at
this early stage to break down the existing impediments to economic
development; but undoubtedly democracy, at the same time,
makes it more difficult for governments to hold down the level of
consumption in the degree necessary for rapid development. The
tendency towards dynamic dictatorships of a fascist or communist
type, visible in most parts of the under-developed world, should
be viewed in the perspective of this basic political dilemma.
   Independent of whether it is democratic, oligarchic or dicta-
torial, the state, which is supposed to do all this planning and put

  1] am again quoting from the lecture on Democratic Values by Mr. Aneurin
Bevan, cited in Chapter 4.
                                    83
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
it into effect, is often in under-developed countries a weak state,
served by a comparatively ineffective and sometimes_corrupt
administration. It is usually particularly weak at the provincial
and local level.
   Central economic planning is always a difficult thing and, where it
has been tried, it has seldom been a complete success in the advanced
countries. Now, what amounts to a sort of super-planning has to
be staged by under-developed countries with weak political and
administrative apparatuses and largely illiterate populations.
   There is reason to expect numerous mistakes and in many cases
total failure; but the alternative to making the attempt is continued
acquiescence in economic and cultural stagnation, or regression,
which is politically impossible in the world of today. This is, of
course, the explanation why large-scale national planning is at
present the goal in under-developed countries all over the globe
and why this policy line is unanimously endorsed by the govern-
ments and experts of the advanced countries.
   One more general observation: the population reproduction rate
is of crucial importance for the national economic planning. The
explosive development of medical science implies that the lowering
of mortality rates, which in the now advanced countries was a slow
process stretching over generations, can be expected to happen in
a very much shorter span of time in the under-developed coun-
tries, and that it will proceed independently of whether levels of
living are, in fact, rising. In many individual parts of the under-
developed world the death rate is already today lower than it was
in the advanced countries in the childhood of generations still
living. ‘There is no reason why their situation should not become the
normal one in under-developed countries within a decade or two.
   If fertility does not decrease simultaneously
effect of the health reforms is the opposite one—the rate of natural
population increase will tend to rise. The under-developed coun-
tries today have a population about one-third larger than at the
outbreak of the Second World War; they can be expected to double
their population within the next thirty or forty years. In all
under-developed countries, even in those with a fairly favourable
                                 84
                  National Economic Planning
relation between population and natural resources, a rapid increase
of the population, by requiring increased investments merely in
order to maintain the standard of living at present levels, will tend
to hamper and slow down economic development. This implies
that a given rate of development will require greater sacrifices.
   The national plan should therefore include a population policy,
aimed at controlling fertility. A vigorous and successful birth
control campaign will be needed already to prevent the rate of
natural population increase from rising.

An Induced and Controlled Cumulative Process
   I shall not dwell further upon the practical difficulties to be
overcome by national planning for economic development of
under-developed countries. I have made these condensed re-
marks, however, in order to provide a general background to the
discussion of two questions on which I should like to reflect a little
more thoroughly: what, considered as an abstract model, is a
national plan? and from where can it rationally derive its criteria?
   The answer to the first question follows from what has been said
before. Anational plan should bea blue-print of acumulative process
of economic development in a country, as this process will evolve
when started, sustained and controlled by certain induced exo-
genous changes in the social system, represented by purposeful
state interferences as defined in the plan. This blue-print must
therefore be built on a study of the circular causation running back
and forth between all relevant factors in the social system of the
country, ‘““economic”’ as well as ‘“‘non-economic’”’.
   The hypothesis of circular causation, which tends to be the
doctrine of despair for the poorer countries as long as they leave
things to take their natural course, holds out glittering prizes for a
policy of purposive interferences. Applied to a goal-directed
national endeavour it promises results much bigger than the efforts
implied—if the efforts succeed in starting a cumulative process
upwards.
   From my account of the development problems of the American
Negro people in Chapter 2—which served as a concrete
                                 85
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
exemplification of the circular causation of a cumulative develop-
ment process—I drew the conclusion that, precisely because of the
fact of circular causation, an upward movement can be effected by
any number of policy measures, independently of where the initial
push is applied. But I also stressed that from the point of view of
economy of effort it matters very much how a development
problem is tackled. From this point of view, the national plan is
the determination of a strategy for state interference, aimed at
maximising the general economic advance of a country, given the
sacrifices the people can safely be expected to accept. Because of
its poverty, an under-developed country desperately needs to
ascertain by careful study how to apply its efforts to get the maxi-
mum   return.
   I stress the need that the plan should be founded on study, and
indeed study of some of the least accessible functional relationships
in the social system: namely the coefficients of circular causation
between all the factors in the system. I believe that the emphasis
on the need for such a study is entirely justified on rational
grounds. Real progress in national planning, gradually lifting it
to the plane of advanced applied social science, will come when
and as our knowledge is enriched about these relationships.
   At the same time it needs also to be stressed that a national
plan is a strategy for action. A government committed to bring
about economic development is not in a position to wait for
knowledge to become as complete and certain as would be desir-
able. It has to make the best estimate of facts and relations it can
and to decide on this basis.
   Nevertheless, even from that practical point of view, it is most
important that the government should clearly understand the
logical implications of the plan and what facts and relations are
relevant to it.

Planning Must Be Done in Real Terms
  My next point is this: the national plan cannot rationally be
made in terms of the costs and profits of individual enterprises.
  Most of the investments to be planned are not profitable from
                                 86
                  National Economic Planning
the market point of view. This is true not only of the big invest-
ments, where the main purpose is to create the external economies
for industries which are not yet in existence but are planned for a
distant future, perhaps on the other side of a five or ten year plan.
   It is equally true of investment in most of the manufacturing
industries. In fact, the reason why they have not been made
earlier, and why they would not be made now without the incen-
tive provided by the state in one form or another, is simply that
they cannot be expected to produce the product for sale at a
competitive price.
   Most generally, the explanation why there are unemployed and
under-employed workers in an under-developed country is that
the market provides no effective demand for their labour. Indeed,
the explanation why a region or a country has a stagnating economy
is that it cannot compete successfully. And, from this point of
view, the whole meaning of a national plan is to give investment
such protection from the market forces as will permit it to be
undertaken in spite of the fact that it would not be remunerative
according to private business calculations.
   It is here that the national state comes in as representing the
common and long-term interests of the community at large. It
senses the inadequacy of private business calculations in terms of
costs and profits as they do not reflect faithfully the social goals of
national planning. From the point of view of the common long-
term interests of a nation every new investment and enterprise has
another and additional sort of yield besides the expected money
return to the private or public firm having made them. This is so
if we assume that the aggregate of new investments and new
enterprises provided for in the plan can succeed in touching off a
cumulative process of economic growth.
   The extra-profit yields consist of the value of the external econo-
mies which almost every new enterprise bestows upon other
enterprises, now or in a future which might be distant, the value
of expanding markets, the value of increasing the number of
trained workers and, to the extent that levels of living can gradu-
ally be raised, the productive value of higher levels of consumption
                                  87
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
in general and, in particular, of higher standards of health, educa-
tion and culture. It is inherent in the circular causation within the
entire economic and social fabric during a cumulative expansion
process that the final results as measured in the rise of production
and national income should be many times greater than the
initial costs implied in getting the system under way and keeping
it moving, and the extra-profit yields represent these dynamic
social gains.
   In the national plan these additional economic effects have to be
accounted for. It is, indeed, necessary to complement the profit
calculations by calculations of those other yields also—both
generally in order to give a definite purpose to state interferences,
and particularly in order to give a rational basis to the decisions of
the national plan on the crucial questions of the setting of specific
targets and the balancing of the various interferences. Such
decisions are necessary for determining, in a scheme of rationally
motivated priorities, the level of investment, the distribution of
investment between different industries and between industry
and agriculture as a whole, in health, education and training
schemes, and so on, and the means by which the required results
have to be achieved.
  None of these questions can be answered, nor, indeed, can the
plan be constructed, in simple market terms. A whole cumulative
expansion process has to be blue-printed in terms of concrete
investment projects and their effects: on the volume of production
in various lines, on consumption, on the employment of workers
and natural resources, on health, education and the productiveness
of labour, and so on, in various sectors and in different years, with
main attention focused on the circular causal interactions between
all the factors in the system. The plan must also determine the
concrete state interferences to be applied to the markets in order
to assure that the process really comes off and develops as planned.
   In real life the government has, as I pointed out, to be satisfied
with very approximate estimates. The point is, however, that these
estimates must concern the really important things, not the
largely irrelevant market phenomena.
                                  88
                  National Economic Planning
 The Price System Does Not Give Rational Criteria for Economic
    Planning
    Naturally, the various elements of the price system—and, more
 specifically, money costs, prices and profit rates—constitute the
 terms in which in practice the national plan has largely to be
 enunciated. It provides a main means of detail comparisons within
 the plan, and most decisions from day to day on how to combine
factors of production will have to be based on calculations of
 “opportunity costs” expressed in this manner.
    In fact, a large part of the direction of the economic process
towards the targets aimed at in the national plan has to be effected
by changing costs, prices and profit rates through modifying the
conditions under which the price system functions. To an extent
this implies the transference of the social extra-profit yields into
 individual profits: in the ideal case the modification of the price
system would have absorbed them altogether, so that individual
profit rates gave motivations perfectly harmonious with the goals
of the national plan.
    The criteria for the national planning are, however, entirely
outside the price system. There do not exist any “objective”
criteria for economic planning. The plan and its targets have in
the final analysis to be determined by decisions which represent
choices made between different, alternatively possible, sets of
goals and means. These choices are policy decisions, reached in
terms of national development goals as determined by the political
process.
    From the beginning of the ’twenties there was a lively discussion
in our learned journals about the possibility of any rationality in
a planned economy. It was started off by Professor Ludvig von
Mises who declared that economic planning must fail, because the
absence of a free market, and of a cost and profit system untam-
pered with by the state would preclude the application of any
economic criteria to determine in an objective way what should or
should not be done.
   This thought, that there are such things as ‘‘objective”’ criteria
for determining how the social process should evolve, and that the
                                 89
        Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
market itself provides these objective criteria while planning is
necessarily “‘arbitrary”, contains in a nutshell all the inherited,
irrational predilections holding back economic theory to which I
refer in Part II.
   The ironical fact is that this very type of economic planning,
the rationality of which has so recently been shown to be an
impossibility on logical grounds, is now proceeding in almost all
under-developed countries—often with the competent guidance of
economists, many of whom, in another compartment of their
thinking, harbour whole learned structures of fallacious arguments
in the old tradition to which von Mises did no more than give a
particularly unqualified and, therefore, crude expression.+
   The price system as a part of a very irrational whole, namely the
economy of a backward and stagnating country, can hardly have any
great claim on rationality to begin with. It could even less form the
rational basis for those ‘economic’ and “‘objective’’ criteria as,
furthermore, its continuous modification is a necessary part of
the state interferences which form the operative part of the
national plan. In the ideal case the price system would have been
modified so as to give a faithful expression to the goals of the
national plan, which is, however, almost the reverse of itself
providing the criteria for determining those modifications.
   As I noted at the end of Chapter 4, we have, by a long and
gradual process of public and private organisation of the markets,
in our industrial and highly integrated countries succeeded fairly
well in making the price system our servant and not our master—
though curiously enough this is usually not fully recognised in
popular debate. In many of the most thoroughly organised
economies, like those of Switzerland or the United States, this
debate is often carried on as if prices were actually set by the laws
   1 Many socialist writers have fallen in line with the main assumptions of von
Mises’ argument but taken the opposite stand and insisted that it is quite pos-
sible for economic planning to be rational by maximising ‘“‘welfare’’.
  The modern dispute is only a restaging of old controversies. Among others,
Gustav Cassel presented his version of the liberalistic doctrine more than fifty
years ago. And all the important elements in the modern socialist welfare doctrine
can still earlier be found in a book by von Wieser—who was not a socialist—on
the Natural Value which, according to him, would be realised in the ‘“‘perfect
Communist state” (Der Natiirlichen Wert, Vienna, 1889).
                                       go
                  National Economic Planning
of supply and demand under free competition between ‘“‘free
enterprises”, which is very far from the truth.
   The under-developed countries are now embarking on this
difficult task of assuming control over the price system and
conditioning it to operate as an effective means of carrying out their
national plans. And they are pressed by circumstances to do it in
a much more sudden and thorough way, and on a much weaker
political and administrative basis.

Not a Gospel of Licence
   When stressing the fact that a national economic plan cannot be
rationally constructed by the application of the criteria of the price
system and private business profitability but that the plan must
consist of the blue-printing in real terms of a cumulative process
of circular causation, in the final analysis directed by political
decisions, I am not preaching a gospel of licence but quite the
contrary.
   To reach deeper than the registration of the market phenomena,
and to ascertain the intricate causal inter-relations as they would
operate in a planned cumulative development process is an analy-
tical task of supreme difficulty. If I am right, however, there is
no other way to rational economic planning than to attempt cal-
culations of these inter-relations in real terms and not as they are
distortedly represented by prices, costs and profits. If practical
planning, at least for a long time, has to be founded on very
approximate estimates of extra-profit yields, the estimates have
nevertheless to concern these much less accessible economic and
social phenomena.
   This approach, if effectively carried out, will in the practical
sphere dictate reasons for an economic policy of suppressing the
temptations to raise levels of living rapidly. A poor under-
developed country which, in the difficult circumstances I have
hinted at in the beginning of this chapter, has the ambition to
“lift itself by its shoe-strings” and start on a sustained economic
development process must, indeed, count inputs and outputs in
the most careful manner and generally apply a policy of frugality.
                                 gi
       Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
   Indeed, a major purpose of the national plan is to effect the
strictest economy with the available resources. Rational economic
behaviour is always concerned with allocating scarce resources
among alternative uses; this is the reality behind the notion of
“opportunity costs”. If, as a matter of fact, many under-developed
countries demonstrate a shocking waste of scarce resources in
“show-piece” public works and in expensive subsidies for invest-
ment and production along blind alleys, this is the result of a
failure in planning, and the only cure is to improve their planning.
This involves getting down to a realistic analysis of the concrete
circular causal relations involved in the cumulative development
process.
   Another purpose of the plan is to overcome the rigidities which
characterise an under-developed economy. The strategy of eco-
nomic planning in under-developed countries must very largely
consist in foreseeing by rational analysis where the bottlenecks are
likely to arise and then to direct policy measures accordingly.
Rational economic planning must aim at enlarging markets and
utilising for its purposes the price formation that takes place in the
markets which are thus expanded. This is, however, not at all the
same thing as taking the criteria for the planning itself from these
market phenomena which are its own creation or results of its
modifications.
   A third general purpose of national economic planning is to free
the minds of the people and the governments from many popular
preconceptions, often originating from their envious comparisons
with the highly developed countries, which otherwise are certain
to dominate the economic policies in under-developed countries.
The only way to do this is by knowledge of the true causal relation-
ships as revealed by rational planning in real terms.

International Trade under National Economic Planning
   These principles apply equally, of course, to international trade.
   The development plan of an under-developed country will as a
rule require large purchases of capital equipment from abroad.
If, as is usually the case, this increase in imports is not fully covered
                                   92
                   National Economic Planning
by gifts or loans from outside, the under-developed country will
have to do its utmost to increase its exports. Its ability to do this,
however, will be limited both by its own productive facilities, and
often by the inelastic nature of the foreign demand; and it may also
have to restrict its imports of consumption goods, and of luxury
goods in particular, if it is to obtain the essential imports it requires.
   These induced changes in the composition of its foreign trade
will have to be matched by production increases in agriculture and
manufacturing industries to stop inflation, and also by price and
consumption regulations at home in order to prevent the demand
for luxury imports from providing incentives for undesirable
investments and production at home. ‘The capital formation for
raising the level of investment has at the same time to be matched
by higher savings procured by various policy measures. All these
induced changes in the quantities of consumption, production,
exports and imports are essential elements in the national plan.
   As investment and production are going up and as factors of
production then have to be induced to move into new combina-
tions, some internal inflationary pressure must always be expected
in a country which is embarking upon economic development.
Even if this is carefully controlled, the process of development is
likely to be reflected in higher money incomes and demand for
consumption goods; and some of the increased demand will always
turn towards imports. As in any case increased imports of capital
goods are bound to put pressure on exchange resources, an under-
developed country bent upon economic development will be
compelled to apply import restrictions in order to protect its
exchange balance, quite apart from any other reasons.
   These import restrictions, which thus under all conditions
become necessary even without any designs for protection, fit,
however, into the national plan which, as I have already pointed
out, assumes that a number of investments will be made which are
not competitive and therefore need shelter. As these new spheres
of production mature to the stage when they can deliver more
goods to the market, they will gradually relieve the inflationary
pressure and the exchange difficulties.
                                   93
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
   Some of this increased supply will consist in more export goods;
an under-developed country will often even have good reasons for
subsidising its exports in certain directions. In a deeply lop-sided
economy such as most under-developed countries inherit from
stagnation and economic colonialism, the larger part of the produc-
tion increase will have to be more new goods for the home market,
replacing imports and gradually allowing an increase of consump-
tion and self-sufficiency.
   I am here reproducing in simplified form the essential elements
of any national plan as observed from the angle of foreign trade and
exchange. The advice under-developed countries are now often
gratuitously given to abstain from interfering with foreign trade,
and from tampering with the foreign exchanges is in most cases
tantamount to advice not to bother about economic development.
   The advice they really need is instead on how to carry their
trade and payments regulations into effect, and how to retain that
necessary minimum of control over internal inflationary pressure
which is a precondition for rational and efficient management of
trade and payments regulations. This latter advice they need very
badly indeed, for monetary, trade and payments policies are all
fields in which an inefficient administration can make a real mess of
national planning for economic development, as many sad examples
demonstrate.

Special Needs for Protection
   Returning to the trade regulations and their employment for
protective purposes, I would insist that quite obviously they
cannot be rationally framed by reference to the ‘‘objective”
economic criteria of the price system, i.e. by means of a simple
application of the static theory of comparative costs. Many
manufacturing industries are thwarted in their growth or pre-
vented from ever coming into existence because of the small size
of the domestic market. This market is frequently flooded by
foreign imports from sources to which this demand is often only
marginal. By providing protection against outside competition,
local industries can be given their chance.
                                 94
                    National Economic Planning
   Another general reason for protection is the fact that, as I have
already pointed out, almost every new industrial enterprise yields
benefits for the economy as a whole, which are not reflected in the
profit calculations, in the form of external economies of all sorts,
an increase of the number of trained workers, etc. These effects
are for various reasons relatively much more important in an under-
developed country than in a developed one.
   An under-developed country is also characterised by the fact
that a large portion of its working force is unemployed or eking out
a bare subsistence through various forms of ‘“‘disguised unemploy-
ment”. ‘This fact that labour is not productively employed is from
one point of view a way of stating that the country is under-
developed; from another point of view it represents its opportunity
to become developed. If part of this ‘“‘free’’ labour can become
gainfully employed, it is a net advantage for the country even if, for
this purpose, a shelter against competition needs to be erected.
   In an under-developed country the span between wages in
manufacturing industry and in agriculture tends, furthermore, for
many reasons, to be particularly broad. This will hamper industry
if it is not given protection to a corresponding degree.
   Interferences in international trade, motivated by considerations
of these types, are only part of the general efforts, defined in the
national plan, to recondition the price system in such a way that a
sustained cumulative process towards economic development is
engendered. The action part of a national plan consists of nothing
else than a system of interferences with the price system, which
must be judged in terms of the practical contribution which they
make towards the cumulative upward process which is the goal of
the plan.

Again No Invitation to Licence
   As applied to the field of international trade, this is again not an
invitation to licence.
   It implies only a change of the normative standard of political
judgment from the logically untenable and fallacious doctrine of
free trade, or some of its euphemisms, to the true interests and
                                  95
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
real causal relationships as they exist in an under-developed
country and becomes revealed by the study of the relevant facts
on which the national plan should be based.
   No under-developed country can afford not to take most careful
account of the international prices of its possible exports and
imports. The prices abroad are independent variables in the
problem: they are given realities which an under-developed
country can usually not influence and modify as it can its domestic
price structure.
   There are, as I pointed out, sound reasons why it may choose to
produce at home things which it could import more cheaply or to
export things at a loss to be covered by subsidy. But those reasons
must take full account of international prices as independently
determined facts, and if this is not done the development process
will be slowed down. The fact that protectionism can be proved to
be rational in an under-developed country should not, of course,
be used to conceal the other fact that the interferences with inter-
national trade, as today actually applied are grossly irrational in
perhaps most under-developed countries.
   As a matter of fact, that old chapter in the theory of inter-
national trade, to which from Ricardo’s time onwards we have
given the title “Comparative Costs” or ‘Comparative Advantage’,
is well worth preserving in the theory of economic under-develop-
ment and development which we need. The extra-profit yields to
which I have referred can be introduced into the scheme as well
as the inflationary pressures and exchange difficulties which are
normal consequences of a policy of economic development. If these
and some other amendments were made in a systematic way,
unbiased by the inherited predilections of economic theory, what
would emerge would be a dynamic theory of comparative costs,
forming an integral part of the general theory of state economic
planning which we need to construct.
   These countries are for many reasons in a different position
from that of the highly developed countries and, as I have ex-
plained in more detail in another connection, there are good reasons
for a “double standard morality” so far as international trade is
                                 96
                  National Economic Planning
concerned. Much of the activity in the International Monetary
Fund and in GATT, and much of the bilateral negotiations about
trade policy outside these organisations, has been based on the
principle do ut des. This may be appropriate in the relations
between highly developed countries, but it implies a false assump-
tion of equality so far as under-developed countries are concerned.
   Inflationary pressure and pressure on their foreign exchange
resources are normal consequences of their economic develop-
ment policy. A strict regulation of their foreign trade becomes
already for this reason a necessity, if they are not to give up their
development policy. In addition, they have by the very facts that
their economies are lop-sided as a result of under-development
and that they lack competitive strength, special reasons, which are
not present for developed countries, for using these regulations
for protection. And as they will be anxious to use every oppor-
tunity to increase their imports, their regulations will not generally
decrease world trade, as those of a developed country actually do
if it manages to keep out of exchange difficulties.
   The under-developed countries have rational grounds for asking
the developed countries to liberalise their trade unilaterally. They
need to be staunch free-traders, and even preserve for themselves
the right to give export subsidies, so far as the advanced countries’
imports from them are concerned, but restrictionists in respect of
their own imports. And they have valid arguments against anyone
who would call this attitude logically inconsistent.




                                  97
                            CHAPTER    8

                       A CHALLENGE

The Under-developed Countries’ Need of Research
   In their drive for economic development the under-developed
countries are up against much greater difficulties than the now
developed countries ever faced.
   The economic level at which they start is in most cases very
much lower. The relationship between population and resources
is usually much more unfavourable and population trends more
dynamic and dangerous. They do not have at their disposal an
international capital market as the now developed countries had in
their time, nor outlets for emigration. They have not inherited
the traditions of rationality and the rule of law which were so
important in the earlier history of the now developed countries.
   And they are late-comers: they have not the opportunity, as the
now developed countries had, to advance as industrial islands in a
surrounding world of backward nations which they could exploit
as markets for manufactured goods and as sources of raw materials,
and for this purpose even keep in colonial bondage.
   The one advantage they have is our accumulated scientific and
technical knowledge; but to utilise this knowledge they need fresh
research in all fields.
   Neither our techniques of politics, administration and social
reforms, nor our techniques in production and distribution can
with advantage be simply taken over as they stand. These tech-
niques have been developed to suit the very different conditions
of the advanced countries, and are inappropriate to the needs of
the under-developed countries.
   Ideally under-developed countries should utilise all the available
knowledge, but work out their own specific techniques to fit their
own values and conditions. To do this effectively, they need to
carry out research on all levels, including fundamental research.
                                 98
                            A Challenge
   In the main, this cannot be done for them. To have any real
chance to be successful in economic development, the under-
developed countries must give the highest priority to the provision
of schools and universities for training scientists and conducting
scientific research in all fields. I have in another connection sug-
gested that the richer countries should consider giving really
substantial aid to the foundation of such institutions. Such aid
would have great and sustained effects in helping the under-
developed countries to gather momentum in a cumulative process
of development.

The Need for New Approaches in Economic Theory
   The under-developed countries have also, for their own free use,
our inherited economic theory; but again they should not accept this
uncritically, but remould it to fit their own problems and interests.
   They should in particular be aware of the fact, which I take up
in Part II, that much of this theory is a rationalisation of the
dominant interests in the industrial countries where it was first put
forward and later developed. In the main, economic theory has
not so far concerned itself with the problems of under-developed
countries. If nevertheless it is uncritically applied to these pro-
blems, the theory becomes wrong.
   As we shall see, this is clearly the situation as regards the theory
of international trade. This theory would, indeed, suggest that
trade starts a movement towards income equalisation, while
instead a quite normal result of unhampered trade between two
countries,   of which   one is industrialised and the other under-
developed, is the initiation of a cumulative process towards the
impoverishment and stagnation of the latter.
   Much of the advice in trade and payments matters which is
currently given to under-developed countries has the same weak
foundation in a theory which is not relevant to the problems of
those countries. This means that this advice is scientifically
unfounded and in practice misleading.
   Most of the literature on the development problems of under-
developed countries is even today produced in the industrially
                                  ey
       Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
advanced countries.   Fortunately it is, on the whole, untheoretical
in its approach, which is an advantage as long as economic theory
is not better adapted to those problems.
   But we can also note that a large part of this literature does not
take its starting point from the interests of the under-developed
countries themselves but, consciously or unconsciously, views
their problems from the national political interests of one of the
advanced countries or a group of them. This situation has become
much worse under the impact of the cold war, when often those
national interests steering the analysis have been narrowed down
to mere strategic interests in that world conflict.
   As the under-developed nations now increasingly become
articulate about their desires and worries, a change of direction of
research can be expected. Economic problems will increasingly
be studied from the viewpoint of their interests. As this is also the
viewpoint of the equality ideal, which has always had such a basic
position in economic theory, this new direction of economic
research will be very much in line with strong and deep urges in
our Western civilisation, which stem from the age of Enlighten-
ment and from still further back.
   It is my view, for which I attempt to give the reasons in this
book, that this new orientation of economic theory towards greater
realism in regard to existing economic inequalities will imply the
final liquidation of the old laissez-faire predilections and, more
specifically, the free trade doctrine and the stable equilibrium
approach. Also, the distinction between ‘‘economic factors’? and
“non-economic factors” will likewise have to be discarded as
illogical and, consequently, misleading. Economic analysis will
have to deal with all the relevant factors if it wants to be realistic;
general economic theory will have to become social theory.
   I believe that the main hypothesis for this new theory will
then be the assumption of circular causation between all factors
in the social system resulting in a cumulative process, and I have
tried to sketch an outline of a general theory of this kind. The
outline hardly gives more than a vision of what has to be accom-
plished before we can really talk about a general theory for the
                                 100
                           A Challenge
economic process. In this new theory there would be place for
many special arguments and theories which are now included in
our inherited theory. They would thus be salvaged for continued
use in a new setting; to this point I will revert in Chapter 11.
   Let me add also that I have no illusions that it will ever be
possible to fit such a general theory into a neat econometric model.
The relevant variables and the relevant relations between them are
too many to permit that sort of heroic simplification. This does
not mean, however, that particular problems could not with
advantage be treated in this way—provided that the variables and
assumptions were selected on the basis of such insight into essential
facts and relations as only a general theory can furnish.
   I feel sure that in years to come economists in all countries will
increasingly come to study the development problems of under-
developed countries in the light of the interests, values and aspira-
tions of those countries themselves. But, undoubtedly, the primary
responsibility rests upon their own young economists. When
lecturing in Cairo, the capital of one of the poorest and most restive
of the under-developed countries, it was natural to me to address
myself at the end to the many students in my audience and declare
to them what I consider to be a great challenge and an oppor-
tunity. And even if this book seeks a wider audience, I find it
appropriate that I should give a summary record here of what I
then said.

 The Role of the Young Economists in the Under-developed Countries
   In this epoch of the Great Awakening, it would be pathetic
if young economists in the under-developed countries got led
astray by the predilections of the economic thinking in the ad-
vanced countries, which are hampering the scholars there in their
efforts to be rational, but would be almost fatal to the intellectual
strivings of those in the under-developed countries.
   I would instead wish them to have the courage to throw away
large structures of meaningless, irrelevant and sometimes blatantly
inadequate doctrines and theoretical approaches, and to start their
thinking afresh from a study of their own needs and problems.
                                 IOI
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
This would then take them far beyond the realm of both outmoded
Western liberal economics and Marxism.
   Instead of chewing over our old doctrines and doctrinal contro-
versies, many of them a hundred years old or more, they should
take their pick of what is really practical and useful in our tradition,
and then proceed to make their own theoretical constructions to
suit their problems. They would then find that many old and
familiar arguments and theorems become useful when adjusted to
fit into a new frame.
   All the under-developed countries are now starting out on a line
of economic policy which has no close historical precedent in any
advanced country. In the same way as the course of economic
events and policies in advanced countries always gave rise to new
realignments of social and economic theories better fitted to, and
closely conditioned by, the immediate historical circumstances,
it would be entirely appropriate if the very different events and
policies in the under-developed countries today were accepted as a
challenge to produce new and different theoretical frames for social
and economic research.
   If this hope could come true, an incidental effect of the awaken-
ing of this large majority of mankind, which has up till now mainly
subsisted in economic and cultural backwardness, would be new
scientific discoveries and the widening of our spiritual horizon—
in the end the enrichment of our common culture. It is under the
inspiration of this brave hope that in this book, as earlier in the
lectures upon which it is based, I permit myself to deal in some-
what provocative terms with a number of the inherited theoretical
approaches as they have been fashioned in the privileged countries
during their period of economic advance and unchallenged
intellectual hegemony over the world.
   In one respect, students from under-developed countries should
have an initial special advantage: namely that normally they should
be further detached from the particular needs for rationalisation
that have dominated the development of economic theory in the
relatively rich and advanced countries.     It is, indeed, natural that
they take as their starting point the need to satisfy the demands of
                                  102
                            A Challenge
 the destitute masses in the under-developed countries. With them
 the tendency would thus rather be that the equality doctrine came
 to serve as the antidote to the conservative laissez-faire predilec-
 tions instead of vice versa in our Western tradition (Chapter 10
 below).
    In the process of transmitting economic theory to the great and
 growing number of students in the under-developed countries, I
see even the chance for a more fundamental change than the one
from the predominance of one type of doctrine predilection to
 that of another one. For in freeing themselves from the earlier
 type of predilection they naturally get involved in a logical critic-
 ism of them and the theory which harboured them. As they thus
 are brought to adopt a viewpoint placed outside the doctrinal
 tradition in economics, there then exists the possibility that they
 might come to see for themselves how these predilections represent
a normative and teleological element in our thinking: the old
metaphysical artifice of treating values as facts.
    And they might rise to the ambition of avoiding this irrational
element in their thinking altogether. The chance that they may do
sois admittedly slight. As the history of social science demonstrates,
the normal and natural thing would be that they speedily equip
themselves with new predilections of their own, corresponding to
their different rationalisation needs, and fortify those predilections
by building them into a new metaphysical system. But it should
not be excluded that some of them might attempt to use the transi-
tional moment of intellectual freedom, when they are in the course
of liberating themselves from our doctrinal predilections, consci-
ously to start out with the intention of constructing social theory
free from objectified valuations.
    The rational way to do this is to work with explicit value premises,
not only when drawing the practical and political inference but,
prior to that, when ascertaining and analysing the facts and the
causal relations. This methodological clarification and its applica-
tion in their scientific work would sharpen their analytical tools
and make these tools much more powerful also when used for
practical and political purposes.
                                    103
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
   To pick out what is really useful and practical in our traditional
theoretical approaches—to throw away the ballast, but at the same
time shape what is of value in the old arguments and theorems,
so as to fit into a different approach to economic and social pro-
blems—is, however, by no means an easy accomplishment. It is
not a task for dilettanti and ignoramuses—they are usually the
first to succumb to traditional predilections or some of their
popular perversions, often without even knowing their intellectual
bondage.
   They are the least original. No critic has ever been effective
without knowing thoroughly what he was criticising. The steep
upward path I am sketching out for the young social scientists in
under-developed countries demands, in fact, the most intense
efforts to attain to true learning and the fullest mastery of the
entire theoretical heritage.
   It is much easier to be a conformist than a competent rebel.




                                104
              PART   II

Economic Inequalities, the Public
Conscience and Economic Theory
M4,
                                CHAPTER 9
            THE     EQUALITY DOCTRINE AND
                    THE ESCAPE FROM IT

In the first chapter of this book I pointed out that our inherited
body of economic theory has been very little concerned with the
important facts of the existing inequalities as between countries
and between regions within a country. The rest of this book will
be devoted to an attempt to explain why this has been so. These
inequalities form, of course, only one aspect of the wider problem
of inequalities generally as between individuals and social groups
in society.

The Radical Tenets of Western Civilisation
   All in the small group of the richer nations are now effective
democracies, and all have embarked, though only in recent
decades, on far-reaching policies to diminish economic inequalities
within their own boundaries between regions and social classes.
There are important relations between economic development,
political democracy and economic equalisation policies, which I
discussed in Chapter 4.
   At this point in the argument, however, I want to stress the fact
that from the beginning, indeed long before these countries were
in any true sense political democracies or had undertaken any of
the modern equalisation policies, the economic and social theories
prevalent there were strongly egalitarian. These theories had at
their very roots ultra-radical policy premises, directly emanating
from the philosophies which had developed in the general cultural
setting of what we call Western civilisation.?
  1 For what follows in Part II, see the author’s   The Political Element in the
Development of Economic Theory, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1953;
see also ‘“The Relation between Social Theory and Social Policy’, The British
Journal of Sociology, September 1953, pp. 211 ff., and a forthcoming volume:
Value in Social Theory. A Selection of Essays on Methodology, by Gunnar
Myrdal, edited by Paul Streeten, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1957.
                                     107
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
   From the philosophy of natural law emerged the doctrine of
labour’s moral superiority as title to property: labour was the only
‘creator of wealth’.    In its modern formulation, this idea stems
from Locke; it materialised in the classical theory of “real value”
which assumed labour as the only real “factor of production’’.’
   From natural law philosophy came also the idea that “‘all men
are born equal”. Primarily this doctrine was understood in the
moral sense that all have the same rights in society. This was con-
ceived as an evident truth, needing no other support than unbiased
reflection over the social relations in natural society where those
relations were not distorted by unnatural and unjustified institu-
tions. It would hold true even if natural endowments were not
equal. That a man was less gifted should not infringe upon his
rights.
    But the moralistic doctrine of equality of rights undoubtedly
gathered additional strength by the parallel naturalistic doctrine,
which from Locke onwards was also prominently placed in natural
law philosophy, minimising individual differences in inborn
capacities and aptitudes. To Locke, the spiritual father of French
as well as English Enlightenment philosophy, the newborn child
was a tabula rasa upon which the “‘sensations”—i.e. in modern
language, the entirety of life experiences—later made their imprint.
Environment was thus made supreme, and this was the basis of the
rationalistic optimism of the age.
    When later individual variations in natural endowments were
increasingly recognised, the theory was nevertheless upheld for
 comparisons between groups of people. As we know, modern
 research has in the last half century gone a long way to prove
 scientifically the correctness of this essential kernel of the
 naturalistic doctrine of human equality with respect to natural
 endowments and thereby justified the environmental approach in
 the social sciences which lays the basis for rational radicalism in
 social reform.
    At this stage of our exposition the point to stress is, however,
 simply that the naturalistic equality doctrine, though it fortified the
  1 The Political Element in the Development   of Economic   Theory,   pp. 64 ff.
                                      108
                      The Equality Doctrine
moralistic one, is not a logically necessary presumption for it; nor
can the moralistic doctrine be logically inferred from the natura-
listic one. When in this book I refer to the equality doctrine,
it is the moralistic assertion of all men’s equal rights I have in
mind.
    The utilitarian philosophers in their turn developed further the
old concept of a ‘‘general welfare’. They took over from natural
law philosophy its implicit hedonistic psychology and elaborated
it with the intention of providing the empirical basis for the calcu-
lation of “pleasures” and “‘pains’’, the arithmetical sum of which
was supposed to constitute the ‘“‘general welfare’”’. The main thesis
of utilitarianism was that it was the rational policy goal of organ-
ised society that this sum should be maximised. In the philo-
sophical tradition through generations, out of which economic
theory branched off, it was never disputed, and is not disputed
today, that in the calculation of the “general welfare’ every
individual human being should be counted as equal to every other
individual.
   From the hedonistic psychology was also derived the idea of the
diminishing “marginal utility” of an income unit as the total
income increased. It was early accepted, and only further ela-
borated by Bentham and James Mill, that this idea provided a
general proof for the principle that equalisation of wealth and
incomes was in the interest of society.
   As the expression of an ideal the equality doctrine may have the
full support of our sentiment in that we find it corresponds to our
desire of how things ought to be in the world—and the author may
be permitted to state his complete allegiance to this general valua-
tion, basic to the moral ambitions of Western civilisation.    In the
present study the ideal of equality of opportunity is posited as one
of the two main value premises, the other being the desirability
of political democracy. But judged as “theory”, where in the
fashion just illustrated the ideal is “proved” to be a logical infer-
ence from premises of facts, this is all a lot of empty metaphysics
with no relations to reality.
   These various currents of the ultra-radical equality ideal—
                                  109
         Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
“proved” in so many different ways and given a slightly different
logical content depending upon its particular theoretical derivation!
—came together during the Enlightenment period, and formed
from then on a main element of the political conscience of the
Western world. But the sources of these streams have to be sought
much further back in mankind’s history. All great religions and
philosophies have, on a general plane, been egalitarian. It is still a
largely unsolved sociological problem, why and how it happened
that this shining idealistic vision of the dignity of the individual
human being and of his basic right to equality of opportunity
originated, and how it maintained its strength through untold
centuries of blatant inequality and oppression.
   The concepts and arguments applied in performing the “proofs”
of the equality doctrine, and giving it a pretended logical justifica-
tion came to form the foundation stones of the classical economic
theory which was built up during the Enlightenment period and
gradually perfected in the first half of the nineteenth century. In
the Preface to his Lectures on Political Economy, Knut Wicksell
points out:2
     As soon as we begin seriously to regard economic phenomena
  as a whole and to seek for the conditions of the welfare of the
  whole, considerations for the interests of the proletariat must
  emerge; and from thence to the proclamation of equal rights for
  all is only a short step. The very concept of political economy,
  therefore, or the existence of a science with such a name implies,
  strictly speaking, a thoroughly revolutionary programme.
  The equality doctrine had thus fastened itself at the rock-bottom
of Western economic speculation. On a very general level it
  1 The natural law arguments lead to the demand for equality of opportunity,
which,   if natural   endowments   were   not the same,   would   still leave certain
inequalities in incomes and wealth in existence. In principle, hedonistic ultili-
tarianism goes further and demands equality in incomes and wealth (later
ultilitarians as, for instance, Edgeworth complicated the scheme by taking into
consideration also the inborn capacity to enjoy happiness which may not be
equal for all men). As every society is very far away from a state of equality,
however defined, these logical differences are of no great importance. The prac-
tical demand is always for social reforms which would change society in the
direction of greater equality, and the natural law ideal of equality of opportunity
has a fortiori utilitarian support.
   * Quoted from the English translation, Lectures on Political Economy, Vol. I,
“General Theory”’, Routledge, London, 1934, p. 4.
                                          IIo
                     The Equality Doctrine
thereafter represented, and represents today, a link between the
philosophies of Conservatives and Radicals, Liberals and Socialists.
It determines the way in which they commonly present and justify
their strivings.
   This is related to the fact that modern economic speculation has
never really gone outside the forms in which it was originally set:
the philosophies of natural law and of utilitarianism and the
psychology of hedonism implied in these philosophies. ‘This can be
verified, for instance, by a careful analysis of the implicit assump-
tions of any of our most recently published textbooks on economic
theory.

An Ideological Force
   As I have already hinted, the equality doctrine is not merely an
abstract formula propounded in books and speeches. It is also an
expression of a living ideal and as such part of social reality: a
valuation, actually perceived by people to be morally right. This is
an important political fact. Thanks to this, the equality doctrine
or, rather, the ideal it expresses became an ideological force in
society, influencing—in some measure—human strivings. Over
the ages it has always pulled in one direction: towards greater
equality of economic opportunity.
   This long ideological pull must not be forgotten when explain-
ing the more recent development in the richer countries towards
national integration, and an ever fuller realisation of equality of
opportunity. The Great Awakening in the very poor countries,
which is now under way, also reflects, of course, the equality ideal
of Western civilisation. From one point of view its essence 1s,
indeed, that this old inherited ideal of the richer countries is now
rapidly and effectively being spread in the under-developed world,
and there spurring the peoples into revolt against their poverty—
with a very apparent implication that their poverty is not all their
fault.
   This radical equality doctrine, underlying the basic philosophies
and also reflected in people’s actual attitudes, has for centuries
been something of an anomaly in a world characterised by gross
                                  III
       Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
inequalities, and mainly ruled by vested interests bent upon pre-
serving those inequalities. Let me stress again that the surprising
thing is not that our society has all the time tolerated so much
economic inequality, but that through the ages people have kept a
sanctuary in their minds for such a high-pitched ideal as is ex-
pressed by the equality doctrine.
  Even within each of the Western countries, there has been all
the time a great disparity between, on the one hand, social reality,
including everyday human behaviour and, on the other hand, this
radical equality doctrine continuously upheld zm abstracto. Indeed,
in the period around the end of the eighteenth and the beginning
of the nineteenth century, when in the literature of the advanced
countries the equality doctrine was enunciated most explicitly and
given particular emphasis, the economic inequalities in those
countries as between regions and social classes were appalling.
   At that time very little was done by way of reform policies,
directed towards mitigating the inequalities. The policies then
actually propounded by the economists were usually not very radi-
cal, viewed in the light of what has later been accomplished in
those countries. They were, of course, still less radical in the light
of the equality doctrine which held such a dominant position
in literature and public debate in this period.

The Belief in Innate Differences
   This moral situation can only be fully understood if we realise
that in a queer co-existence with the radical equality doctrine there
persisted also the age-old reactionary belief in innate differences
in quality between groups of people having different standards of
economic well-being. I have already stressed that in pure logic the
moralistic equality doctrine that men have equal rights, is not
dependent on a premise that men are equally endowed by nature.
But certainly it is easier to adhere to the first ideal and to give it
practical expression in social reform, if the latter proposition is also
accepted as true.
   All discussion of social reform turns very much, in the final
instance, on the vexed problem of the relative importance of nature
                                  112
                      The Equality Doctrine
and nurture. A Swedish political scientist of the generation that
has now passed, Rudolf Kjellen, once ventured the observation that
the radical is inclined to believe that the occasion makes the thief
while the conservative is apt to suspect that the thief is likely to
find the occasion. According to the radical, the blame and the
responsibility for what is imperfect in society rest on the environ-
ment which can be changed. The individual, and thereby society,
can be improved by social reform.
  The conservative, on the contrary, thinks that it is human nature,
and not environment which, on the whole, makes individuals and
society what they are. Human nature is unchangeable. This is a
reason, and a justification, for the conservative’s scepticism in
regard to social reform. He is therefore inclined towards a policy
of laissez-faire or do nothing.
   As I pointed out, the philosophies of the Enlightenment period,
which formed the basis for economic theory, depreciated differ-
ences in human nature. Man and society could be reformed by
altering social institutions. But the belief in innate differences, not
only between individuals but between groups, also persisted. In
one particular respect, the secularist rationalism of the Enlighten-
ment, by placing homo sapiens in the natural order as an animal,
even gave increased emphasis to human nature and made it more
likely on a priori grounds that there could be distinct species of men.
It was in the eighteenth century that the word and concept “race”
was first born, opening up, for example, the possibility of defend-
ing Negro slavery by arguments of racial inferiority instead of by
the old theological justification that they were pagans. Later
Darwin’s theory of the survival of the fittest gave a rationalising
explanation why differences in innate qualities between social
classes should be expected as result of evolution.
  On the whole, however, the social sciences and, in particular,
economic theory stuck stubbornly to the naturalistic equality
postulate that as a general rule men are equally endowed by nature;
they could thereby also uphold the environmental approach. And
as I noted, the research in recent decades on group differentials of
intelligence and other mental capacities and aptitudes has given
                                  113
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
this fundamental presumption of social and economic theory a still
firmer foundation.
   The contrary belief in great and systematic differences between
groups of people continued, however, to live its very real life in the
convictions of ordinary people—and often also in those of the philo-
sophers and theorists when they were away from their doctoral
pursuits. This belief was never restricted to different races but was
applied also to social classes within a country. Indeed, as I just
pointed out, the modern intense interest in racial differences is only
a couple of centuries old, while economic, social and religious
distinctions have always been important in the public mind. ‘The
poor as a class were supposed to be less well endowed intellectually
and morally.
   And people based their conviction on what they conceived to be
their experience and on everyday observations from which they
draw inferences. As a matter of fact the differences between
various social strata were great, much greater than is the case today
—in health, education and training, customs, morals and general
culture—and these differences were reflected also in differences of
productive capacity.
   Philosophers and economists had a general argument to counter
the inferences drawn from such observations, namely that these
differences were themselves only the result of earlier economic
inequalities. But it was difficult for ordinary people to believe that
this was the whole explanation. And it is apparent that even
scholars preserved a lingering doubt—and sometimes more than a
doubt—that at bottom some differences were innate.

Escapism in Economic Theory
   Returning to the realm of economic theory, we face a strange
paradox. On the one hand, economic theory was that branch of
social speculation where the ultra-radical equality doctrine was
“proved” and logically sharpened into a particularly clear and
cutting instrument of “‘objective” valuation. On the other hand,
having firmly placed the equality doctrine at its structural founda-
tion, economic theory demonstrated from the beginning a
                                114
                         The Equality Doctrine
particularly strong tendency to escape from raising the equality
issue.
   The equality doctrine, after it had been proved, was most often
confined to general statements in an abstract compartment in the
basement, insulated by impregnable abstruseness—while for the
rest economic theory was developed so as to avoid as much as
possible stating problems in such a way that the equality doctrine
could be used as a premise for practical policy interferences.
   From John Stuart Mill on, a main device for effecting this eva-
sion has been, as we know, the drawing of a sharp dividing line
between the sphere of production, including exchange, and the
sphere of distribution. In the sphere of production natural laws
reigned, and policy interferences would only hamper production;
distribution of incomes and wealth, on the other hand, was the
sphere for policy where the equality doctrine had its legitimate
space of validity.
  Though this was not logically implied, and though it was not
Mill’s intention, economists         have since then and for more than
a hundred years utilised this device for the purpose of directing
their analysis almost entirely on production and exchange,
while expressing a general reservation in regard to distribution
of incomes and wealth and the need for redistributional
reform.
   It is, of course, possible to explain this tendency in the direction
of economic analysis by saying that the economists have in the
main been interested in problems other than those pertaining to
equality and inequality. They have been interested in production
and in trade. In the pursuit of free science the direction of
research should be left to the scientific curiosity of individual
scientists, and I am the last to query this fundamental principle of
academic freedom. But I maintain that the distinction between a
production sphere and a distribution sphere, utilised in economic
analysis for concentrating attention on the problems of production,
is logically untenable;! and this is, from one point of view, a main
explanation why many of our theories have been defective.
     1 The Political Element in the Development of Economic Theory, pp. 129 ff.
                                       115
       Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
   More fundamentally, and apart from this, it remains to be
explained why, as the aggregate outcome of the inclinations of so
many generations of economists, economics as a science was
oriented in this particular direction and so avoided, in the main,
the problems of the distribution of incomes and wealth.

The Significance of Malthus
   In his time, Ricardo did not seek to avoid the problem of dis-
tribution. On the contrary, he proclaimed as the primary task of
political economy to explain the prices of the three productive
factors, labour, capital and land, and thus the distribution                 of
income. And he stressed—and overstressed by the static abstrac-
tion from changes and the inter-relations between the changes—the
interest conflict between the different economic classes: none of
them could have an increased share of the social product except at
the expense of one or both of the other classes.
   It would seem that on the basis of this theory combined with the
philosophical premises of utilitarianism, to which he firmly ad-
hered, Ricardo should have come out for redistributional reforms
on a large scale—as, indeed, many radical writers did in his own
time and later, often basing their thinking on his theory of income
distribution.   Ricardo himself, however, and after him the writers
who came to represent the classical line in economic theory stuck,
on the whole, to /aissez-faire even in regard to income distribution.
   This has to be related to Ricardo’s theory of natural wages.
This theory, in its turn, was derived from Malthus’ law of popula-
tion. The thought is much older, though Malthus first gave it
elaboration and emphasis. In Europe its spread and influence in
the beginning of the nineteenth century was part of the general
movement towards strengthening the foundations for economic
conservatism which developed in reaction to the French and the
American revolutions.?
     Malthus and Ricardo did not fail to point out that ambitions
  for higher living standards, say as a result of better education,
  could alter the whole situation. But in most of their theoretical
    1 The Political Element in the Development of Economic Theory, p. 118.
                                     116
                           The Equality Doctrine
  arguments they used what they took to be an empirically verified
  assumption, viz., that there is an equilibrium level of wages
  which is determined by the cost of production of the means of
  subsistence. The standard of living of workers in terms of the
  real goods and services which their wages can buy was regarded
  as constant. Higher wages, more generous poor relief, or any
  other “‘artificial” interference aimed at increasing the share of
  the poor, can only result in a higher reproduction rate. Capital
  formation is reduced because profit is reduced. The reduction
  of profit is aggravated by the increased share which goes to
  landlords, for the population increase forces up rent. Wages, in
  terms of means of subsistence, soon return to their original level.
  Thus any intervention aimed at an increase in the standard of
  living of the workers is doomed to failure because of their
  natural urge to procreate. The poor would always stay poor,
  only the rich would be less rich.
     ... whether Ricardo was right or wrong, we are concerned
  here with what he actually believed. There are several indica-
  tions that Ricardo regarded the lot of the workers as regrettable
  but inevitable. Social utility, or at any rate a substantial part of it,
  was believed to be represented by the values which go to the
  propertied classes. In the short run one might increase social
  utility by taking from the rich and giving to the poor. But in the
  long run the poor would sink back to their lower standard and
   the situation as a whole would be worse, for the rich would now
   be somewhat poorer.

   When, towards the middle of the century, John Stuart Mill wrote
his Principles of Political Economy, with Some of Their Applications
to Social Philosophy, a big change had occurred which drew away
the props from under this motivation for conservative laissez-faire
in the sphere of distribution: birth control had come within sight
as a possible and effective means of preventing Malthus’ popula-
tion law to make redistributional reforms useless. And in the
decades to follow the fall in fertility rate gradually began to catch
up with the fall in mortality rates which had already gone on for a
long time.
  1 Ibid., pp.   116f. and 119. The argument would logically have led not only to
laissez-faire in distribution, but to protection in favour of the rich; but as Ricardo’s
heart—as well as his basic philosophical premises—was siding with the poor,
laissez-faire emerged as a sort of compromise; see ibid., pp. 119 ff.
                                          EL
       Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
   The economic theorists who did not want to step into too radical
policy conclusions from the equality doctrine could no longer have
recourse to Ricardo’s theory of natural wages. In this situation
they made increasingly good use of Mill’s distinction, which I
referred to in the last section. It permitted them to concentrate
their attention on the problems of production and trade, by making
only a general reservation in regard to distribution.
   When now after the Second World War and under the influence
of the Great Awakening the perspective of economic analysis is
enlarged to encompass the under-developed countries effectively,
Malthus’ population theory again becomes relevant. Clearly a
large part of their populations are living on a Malthusian
subsistence level, where any potential improvement in levels of
income is in danger of being swallowed up by population
increase.
   In the richer countries the temptation must then be strong to
question the rationality of doing anything substantial to improve
living conditions for the poorer nations: on theoretical grounds
laissez-faire may seem to be the right policy. A logical basis for
neutralising the equality doctrine can be constructed similar to
Ricardo’s theory of natural wages.
   In the world as it is today, however, political reasons make it
increasingly difficult to stick to such a negative attitude on the level
of theory and general principles. But there is a sinister reality in
the population worry. And anyone who wants to take the equality
ideal at all seriously has to hope and pray for lower fertility rates,
and has to demand that measures for the rapid spread of birth
control be made part of the economic planning for economic
development of under-developed countries.

The Reasons for Compromise
   Even apart from the population issue, there are obvious reasons
why any straight and sudden realisation of the equality doctrine
would appear undesirable and, indeed, disastrous in its effects.
‘These reasons are all founded in the existing inequalities as between
people in different social strata.
                                   118
                        The Equality Doctrine
   Economic theory had from the earliest beginnings developed in
the tradition of enlightened humanitarian rationalism, and it had
never given any intellectual hospitality to the reactionary belief in
innate differences in quality between different groups of people.
The existing differences as between different nations and, within a
nation, different economic classes were caused by the environment
and more specifically by earlier economic inequalities. Neverthe-
less it is clear that, whatever the cause, these differences, and in
particular the differences in productive capacity, support the con-
tinued existence of the economic inequalities. Any attempt at a
large-scale or rapid change towards greater equality would break
institutional continuity.
   Its immediate effects would be disorganisation and a decrease in
production of goods and services. It is with this motivation that
Alfred Marshall concluded:!
     ... that therefore it is the part of responsible men to proceed
  cautiously and tentatively in abrogating or modifying even such
  rights as may seem to be inappropriate to the ideal conditions
  of social life.
   A rational equalisation policy necessarily implies a time-con-
suming social process, particularly if the assumption is the
desirability of peaceful change by means of gradual reforms. Even
after the decisions in favour of reforms have been taken, large-scale
inequalities will have to remain in existence for a long period, if a
decrease in production is to be prevented. This is the problem
which, for a century and more, has been discussed in economic
theory—though mostly only in a static equilibrium setting—as
the conflict between more equal distribution and higher pro-
ductivity.
   In Marshall’s formulation:?
     Taking it for granted that a more equal distribution of wealth
  is to be desired, how far would this justify changes in the
  institutions of property, or limitations of free enterprise even
  when they would be likely to diminish the aggregate of wealth?
  1 Principles of Economics, 7th ed., Macmillan, London, 1916, p. 48.
  2 Ibid., p. 41.
                                     11g
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
  Marshall stressed that the great economists have all the time
upheld the equality ideal:
     The fact is that nearly all the founders of modern economics
  were men of gentle and sympathetic temper, touched with the
  enthusiasm of humanity. They cared little for wealth for them-
  selves; they cared much for its wide diffusion among the masses
  of the people. . . . They were without exception devoted to the
  doctrine that the wellbeing of the whole people should be the
  ultimate goal of all private effort and all public policy. ... The
  rights of property, as such, have not been venerated by those
  master minds who have built up economic science. . . .

  To develop his ideals, according to Marshall, “the economist
needs imagination”’:?
     But most of all he needs caution and reserve in order that his
  advocacy of ideals may not outrun his grasp of the future...
  (The founders of modern economics) appeared cold, because
  they would not assume the responsibility of advocating rapid
  advances on untried paths. .. . Their caution was perhaps a little
  greater than necessary: for the range of vision even of the
  greatest seers of that age was in some respects narrower than
  is that of most educated men in the present time. ...

   The fact that the great economists, as Marshall correctly
emphasised, did not have a vision for social reform which quite
matched their egalitarian ideals, and that therefore their thinking
was dominated not only by sound but also by merely apparently
sound, reasons why economic inequalities had to be tolerated, at
least provisionally, naturally made it somewhat easier for the
wealthier classes to resist the strivings for equality and, in parti-
cular, made it easier for them to do so with a better conscience.

The Dynamics of Equalisation
   The further fact that, as exemplified in the quotation from
Marshall above, the equality issue was raised in simple static terms
as a question of redistribution of income and wealth, and as a
choice between a more equal distribution and a lower level of
        1 Principles of Economics, pp. 47f.   2 Tbid., pp. 46 ff.
                                     I20
                     The Equality Doctrine
productivity, also contributed to decreasing the attractiveness of
doing anything in the direction of equalisation. It would endanger :
economic progress in terms of the total volume of production out
of which everybody’s share was to come. It was thus easier to
believe that the interests even of the poor were better served by
abstaining from redistributional reforms as they would be holding
back production.
  This view is, however, entirely static.     If we seek to learn from
what has actually happened in the richer countries which during
the last half-century have proceeded far in the direction of greater
equality of opportunities we reach instead a dynamic theory: that
the realisation of more equal opportunities has been needed to spur
and sustain economic progress as well as to make good the assump-
tions of social democracy. A corollary to this is the important fact
that in a progressive society—characterised by both redistribu-
tional reforms and economic growth as the two types of social
change mutually support each other by circular causation—the
improvement of the lot of the poor can often be won without
substantial sacrifices from those who are better off and is sometimes
not only compatible with, but a condition for, the attainment of
higher levels in all income brackets, including the higher ones.
   But this dynamic theory is now emerging more as an after-
thought. It never played much of a role either in economic theory
or even, until quite recently, in the popular and political advocacy
of redistributional reforms. Reforms were continuously motivated
primarily in terms of social justice, with the implication that the
better situated classes had to pay for them by accepting a lowering
of their living standards. And the question could then be asked
and was also, as a matter of fact, continuously asked: “How far
could this be done without injustice, and without slackening the
energies of the leaders of progress.”! As we remember, another
question asked until very recently even in our most advanced and
enlightened countries was this: would not the desire to work and
save slacken in the lower income groups, when they were relieved
from pressing wants and economic insecurity?
                            1 Ibid., p. 41.
                                 121
         Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
 Other Competing Valuations
    Moreover, even apart from the question of productivity, the
 equality ideal rules only on a very general plane in the valuation
 sphere and is even there not the only valuation. In the case of
 specific issues, relating more directly to the concrete choices of
 everyday human living, the equality ideal will often be almost lost,
 as there are always a great number of other valuations, and as
 some of them conflict with it. Actual attitudes are always
 composite ones, and human behaviour is always a moral com-
 promise.!
    A basic fact is, of course, that people who are better off have
 vested interests to protect. They are, therefore, opportunistically
sensitive to every possibility of a valuation competing with the
equality ideal and every belief tending to neutralise it. This
gives emotional backing to the belief in innate differences in
quality between the rich and the poor. It strengthens the appeal
of all such arguments which inhibit the drawing of practical
inferences from the equality ideal—for instance, the static theory
of the conflict between the rise in productivity and redistribu-
tional reforms.
   If I insist that nevertheless the influence of the general equality
ideal should not be forgotten, I do not deny that people in the main
try to safeguard their interests as they perceive them—and indeed,
that they usually succeed in modulating their conception of reality
enough to preserve an excellent conscience in doing so. But this
much being conceded, I must insist on the important fact that
generous impulses also are real and that they do have their
influence, even if the influence is limited and at times almost
rendered insignificant.

   1'That human behaviour typically is the outcome of a moral compromise of
heterogeneous valuations, operating on various planes of generality and rising
in various degrees, and at different occasions to the level of consciousness, is a
most important fact. It implies that the notion “‘attitude’’, which the social
psychologists use and which was more definitely formulated by W. I. Thomas
in the methodological appendix to his The Polish Peasant at Home and Abroad, is
a clear misconception of reality, if it implies homogeneity. See the author’s An
American Dilemma: the Negro Problem and Modern Democracy; Appendix I, ‘A
Methodological Note on Valuations and Beliefs”, pp. 1027 ff.
                                      I22
                     The Equality Doctrine
The Convenience of Ignorance
   It can be observed that in the compromise thinking and living
which is normal when there is such a dramatic disparity between
the equality ideal and a social reality characterised by gross in-
equalities, people who are better off have usually done their best
to keep their minds off the equality issue.
   In the first place they have tried to remain ignorant of the
poverty and distress of poor people. This is true even in regard to
the living conditions of the lower classes in their own national com-
munities. Ignorance is seldom random but instead highly oppor-
tunistic.1 In every country there have been whole systems of psy-
chological and ideological barriers, protecting the well-to-do classes
from knowledge of social facts which would be embarrassing to
them.
   Everywhere, however, the attainment of political democracy has
resulted in the gradual demolition of these barriers to knowledge.
This was invariably an important stage in the striving for social
reforms. The spread of embarrassing knowledge is one of the con-
sequences of the greater articulateness of the poorer classes them-
selves, and of their organisation, under the shield of democracy,
into pressure groups of various types for pleading their cause and
fighting for it.
   In the same way, solid ignorance of the poverty of the under-
developed world was convenient and opportune to the peoples in
the richer countries. It would be worth while to analyse in some
detail how they succeeded in training themselves to take abstract
cognisance of the occasional starvation of many millions of human
beings somewhere in Asia without really making it a part of their
perception of reality.
   Protected by this heavy fog of opportune ignorance, the real
attitudes of sympathy actually held by people—which I referred to
as forming the emotional or moral basis for the equality ideal as an
ideological force in society—must be thought of as rapidly losing
intensity as the distance from the object increases. In relation to
peoples outside national boundaries and, in particular, peoples of
             1 An American Dilemma, pp. 40ff., 1029 et passim.
                                   £23
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
other races, religions and cultures, living far away, the intensity
easily falls to practically zero.
   The trend in the richer countries during recent decades towards
integration and the realisation of ever greater equality of oppor-
tunity has been narrowly nationalistic. Alfred Marshall—again
to quote this great eclectic master of our science whose mind was
always so sensitive in conscience questions—in the introduction
to Industry and Trade, published just after the First World War,*
faced this situation squarely:

       . . the notion of national trade has been bound up
  with the notion of solidarity between the various members of a
  nation....
     We are indeed approaching rapidly to conditions which have
  no close precedent in the past, but are perhaps really more
  natural than those which they are supplanting:—conditions
  under which the relations between the various industrial strata
  of a civilised nation are being based on reason rather than
  tradition. ...
     ... it is becoming clear that this (Great Britain) and every
  other Western country can now afford to make increased
  sacrifices of national wealth for the purpose of raising the quality
  of life throughout their whole population. A time may come
  when such matters will be treated as of cosmopolitan rather than
  national obligation: but that time is not in sight. For the practi-
  cal purpose of the present and the coming generation, each
  country must, in the main, dispose of her own resources, and
  bear her own burdens.

   If in the richer countries the problems of international inequa-
lities cannot any longer be dealt with in this complacent mood, the
reason is not that people have now become more compassionate
for their fellow human beings all over the world than Marshall
and his contemporaries. What has happened is that the misery of
those far away has been brought home to the peoples in the richer
countries and presented as a threat to their own security.

                   1 Macmillan, London, 1919, pp. 4f.
                                  124
                       The Equality Doctrine
 A New Phase in the Struggle for Equality
    I remarked in Chapter 1 that the awareness of actual economic
 conditions in the under-developed world which is now thrusting
 itself upon the peoples in the richer countries comes as a revelation
 and is embarrassing. It is first and foremost the rising revolt in the
under-developed countries themselves which is the active force in
demolishing the barriers in our minds of opportunistic ignorance.
    ‘The newly won political independence of most of these countries
and the ready availability to their governments of the various
international organisations as sounding boards, provide for this
purpose of disseminating embarrassing knowledge a substitute for
the world democracy which does not exist. It is my belief that the
most important function of the international organisations in
the present stage of world history is to provide forums where the
under-privileged countries can join together in expressing their
dissatisfaction.
    As long as the peoples living in the under-developed world were
subdued and quiet their grievances could be kept away from the
attention of the peoples in the richer countries by an isolating wall
of opportunistic ignorance. A new phase of the age-old struggle for
greater equality—a phase in which the struggle finally encornpasses
the entire globe—has now begun with the Great Awakening.
    I have already observed that from one point of view the Great
Awakening is nothing else than the victorious spread to the peoples
in the under-developed countries of the richer nations’ inherited
ideal of equality of opportunity. ‘Those nations have themselves
been sowing the seed of world revolution. And so strong is the
force and the unity of a culture that, even if they now should try,
they would not succeed in avoiding a continuation of this dis-
semination. However they turn, they will be teaching and preach-
ing equality.
   Nations are not sophisticated enough to be really cynical: even
when their policies are grossly opportunistic, they will rationalise
them in terms of the ideal, and they will do it in good faith. Indeed,
the efforts to give respectability to vested interests by dressing
them up to look like the ideal—which will always imply distorting
                                 125
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
to some extent the beliefs about reality: this is the type of irra-
tionalism that we call rationalisation—are themselves a recognition
of the power of the ideal as a social force.
   In the setting of Western civilisation the poorer countries, once
they succeed in breaking through the barriers of opportunistic
ignorance, will have, as in earlier times the poorer regions and the
lower social classes within the now richer countries have had, a
support in the egalitarian ideal which has an emotional and moral
basis in people’s feelings for what is right and wrong. Whether
this support will be forthcoming so soon, and be so strong, that—
in analogy to what has actually happened within the richer coun-
tries themselves—the world revolution can be canalised into a
process of gradual and peaceful change, is a momentous question
to which the future will give the solemn answer.

Equalisation Upwards
   Such a progress towards a “‘welfare world’, where on a world
scale the principle of equality of opportunity as between nations,
racial and religious groups, and individuals becomes increasingly
realised, would, like the earlier parallel development towards the
national ‘‘welfare state” in the richer countries, regularly turn out
to be a paying proposition even to those who are initially better
off. As with nations, so in the world at large, this process would
be a pre-condition for raising levels of production generally and
not only for promoting social justice.
   What is needed is not primarily a redistribution of wealth and
incomes. Indeed, aid can only be a very small part of a rational
international equalisation programme as it is of a national one.
None of the schemes which have been propounded for capital aid
for development of under-developed countries has ever amounted
to taking away more than a tiny fraction of the yearly increase of
national income per head in the richer countries, which implies
that no real sacrifices have ever been envisaged. And no one who
has advocated these aid schemes has ever hesitated in the belief
that the aid would be profitable as an investment for the richer
countries. A wholesale income equalisation by redistribution
                                 126
                       The Equality Doctrine
between nations is both impossible and, I am inclined to believe,
an unimportant objective.
   Much more important for attaining more equality of opportunity
in the world are reforms which concern the ways in which the
richer countries with their stronger bargaining position conduct,
or fail to conduct, business with the poorer countries.! The reforms
I am thinking of concern the market for their export products, the
market in which they buy their imports, and the organisation of
the capital market.
   The international organisations have on their agenda, or have
had, a great number of proposals for concerted action in these
fields which would assist the under-developed countries much
more than even the most generous aid-schemes could ever do,
while not entailing any appreciable costs for the richer countries;
in most cases these policies would be in their own long-term interest
as well. Progress along this line has been exceedingly slow and
seems now to have been stopped altogether, as I pointed out in
Chapter 5. In Chapter 6 I hinted at some of the explanations of the
cumulative political process which has been bringing the richer
countries to take an increasingly negative attitude in these fields.
   But I would not feel discouraged. In any case we have not the
right to retreat into fatalism. Attitudes may change. And, as
attitudes are based on people’s beliefs, even the increase of true
knowledge is not without importance. It is not excluded that
awareness of the dangers inherent in their non-possumus attitude
might come to spread among the intellectual leaders in the richer
countries and among the common people there.

Fact-finding in the Social Sciences
   I have stressed the importance for this political process of the
dissemination of embarrassing knowledge. It is natural to ask what
role social scientists are playing in these efforts.
   It might be expected that social scientists would have been a
mighty force for rectifying false and opportunistic popular beliefs.
The inherited equality doctrine, placed at the roots of all modern
        1 See ‘‘Aid and Trade”, The American Scholar, spring 1957.
                                   127
       Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
economic and social theories, should have led social scientists in suc-
ceeding generations to seek to lay bare existing economic inequalities
and to explain why they had come into existence. This expectation
would be the more natural as we know that many, perhaps most,
social scientists even up to our own time, were originally led to
their studies because of their interest in social reform.*
   Social scientists could also be expected to have been less able to
remain in opportunistic ignorance, at least in the fields where they
were specialising. Admitting that they too have their blinkers—
corresponding to their share of the prejudices of a community at a
particular time, what Marshall called their narrower range of
vision—it is difficult to see how they could help venturing into
disinterested research now and then.
   And even if they started out with opportunistically biased
views, their analysis was under some discipline both from the
facts and from logic. Thus, the experimental psychologists, who
half a century ago first set out to measure intelligence, actually
shared with their contemporaries the reactionary belief in innate
differences of quality between different groups of people. They
assumed therefore great average differences in intelligence be-
tween rich and poor, whites and Negroes, men and women.                     It is
one of the great triumphs of scientific endeavour that the more
they laboured to measure these differences and the more they
perfected their methods in doing so, the fewer differences they
were able to ascertain.
   There is a deep wisdom in the Bible’s saying: ‘‘He who seeketh,
findeth.”” But under the discipline of the scientific truth-ethos,
psychologists did not find what they had set out to seek. They
were not able to draw the inferences they wished to draw. They
came to conclusions contrary to their hypotheses, and they had to
change them. Scientific research led to the refutation of the
   1 See my earlier quotations from Marshall which I believe are true in charac-
terising the moral inclinations of economists in the line of the great tradition.
In the Marshall Library in Cambridge there is a little painting which had
belonged to Alfred Marshall, portraying a poorly clad, soulful and sympathetic
young man. It is said that Marshall kept this picture near his desk to remind him
constantly that all work in economics should have as its ultimate purpose the
improvement of the conditions of the poorer classes.
                                      128
                     The Equality Doctrine
assumption of innate differences of quality between different
groups of human beings—this reactionary belief which, as I
pointed out, had been counterbalancing the equality ideal.
   Undoubtedly, over the decades the steady growth of ascer-
tained, analysed and organised data has had a mighty influence on
the process of breaking down the opportunistic barriers which
were protecting people from embarrassing knowledge, and has
thus been a force for a growing rationality in their world outlook.
Time and time again in all countries individual social scientists
have also ventured to stir up people’s conscience on a specific issue
with the result that sometimes a permanent mutation in what was
up till then common and comfortable ignorance could be registered.
  Usually, however, social scientists, even as fact-gatherers, work
in the wake of political events rather than in advance of them.
The present intensive efforts to study the problems of under-
developed countries did not precede public concern over these
problems, and still less did our research cause this concern.
On the contrary, this new direction of our research was itself
caused and inspired by the pressure of the events which gave
political weight to those issues.
   When, however, in one way or another an inequality issue is
once open to public debate, usually social science research will
diligently push ahead and do a sort of finishing job: it will continue
to break down and sweep away the remnants of the opportunistic
barriers protecting people from embarrassing knowledge. ‘That is
what to an increasing extent is now actually happening in regard
to the growing awareness of the poverty and distress in under-
developed countries. And the inherited equality doctrine will
continuously give force and energy to this process.

The Traditionalism of Theory
  If in the social sciences fact-gathering research, while it seldom
opens up entirely new vistas, thus tends to reinforce every move-
ment—once it has had an independent start—towards greater
recognition of such social facts as are embarrassing because of
their conflict with established ideals, I am afraid that the same
                                 129
        Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
cannot be said about those vast structures of concepts and
generalisations which we call theories.
   They show generally a much stronger conservative and tradi-
tionalistic bias. Not only do they usually fail by themselves to
develop in a direction which opens up new vistas: they tend on the
contrary to inhibit us from looking at those vistas which are opened
up by other social forces, including fact-finding. This traditional-
ism of theory is also, indeed, a main explanation why fact-finding
research does not demonstrate more daring and originality—why
it regularly moves in the wake of the political events and so
seldom anticipates them.
   In general, I am impressed by the power of tradition in most
theoretical speculations, and particularly so in the economic field.
Even when we are not aware of our bondage, we are all more or less
under the influence of certain very general ideas or patterns of
thought which we have inherited from long ago. At one time or
another they were all solidified into definite doctrines; but even
now when some of these doctrines are not accepted any longer, and
often even when they have actually been refuted, they still prevail
in the form of vaguer predilections and exert considerable influence
on our way of thinking. Even the scholar who breaks new ground
in economic theory is usually original only on one particular front
line of thinking, where by exerting exceptional genius and will
power he succeeds in beating down traditional predilections, while
in other respects he is a traditionalist.
  1 I might be permitted in this connection to make a contribution to the growing
treasure of Keynesiana.
  Some time soon after the publication of his General Theory, Keynes visited
us in Stockholm and spoke at a gathering of the Club of Economists, which had
been founded around Knut Wicksell when, towards the end of the First World
War, he moved to Stockholm from Lund as professor emeritus; at the time of
Keynes’ visit Wicksell had already been dead for some ten years.
   Not surprisingly Keynes had chosen as topic for his talk: ‘“Heresies in Econo-
mics”. After his talk one after another of the younger members of our Club
took the floor and accused Keynes of being too classical on this and that point.
To this day I do not know if there had been a planned conspiracy to tease Keynes
when standing in his favourite pose as the heretic, or if it just happened so.
   Keynes met his young critics with open delight implying that the criticism
directed against him for being too classical, though exaggerated, was a parti-
cularly bright and amusing idea; only gradually did he show some easily under-
standable irritation, as the discussion put him more systematically in defence
against a group of youngsters who stole his pose.
                                      130
                      The Equality Doctrine
   Our tools of analysis have been moulded within the tradition of
these doctrines and predilections. We have had them pressed
upon our work in the form of a certain approach to problems, a
particular manner of looking at things. This determines broadly
what questions we ask and how we ask them. It therefore inhibits
our imagination and, as I just said, this frustration of originality in
turn affects our fact-finding research.
   These inherited and dominating predilections of economic
theory are, however, vague and abstract enough to provide ample
leeway for a great display of scientific acumen and learnedness
and for a measure of inventiveness and controversy. We have in
this tradition become particularly delighted in such mental exer-
cises as are “‘purely scientific’’, in the sense that they have no great
and immediate practical import.
   These predilections are all to a degree value-loaded: many of
them, as we shall find, serve pressing needs for rationalisation.
This increases their influence over our intellectual exertions and
tends—unless we work with explicit value premises—to protect
them from our close awareness and critical attention.

The “Realism of Conservatism”
   In the next chapter I shall attempt to give a condensed analysis
of these predilections which in a usually uncontrolled manner
determine the mental climate in which we work. My main in-
terest will be focused on their logical inter-relations and their
relations to the historically given philosophical basis of economic
theory.
   The point I want to make here, before closing this chapter, is
this: to the extent that our reasoning about economic matters
comes under the influence of these old and powerful predilections,
our attention will regularly be turned away from the equality issue.
It will tend to move our practical and political conclusions in the
direction of the idea that everything will come out to the satis-
faction of all if the natural forces of the market are left their free
play—which, of course, also implies that it is more permissible to
forget about the equality postulate.
                                  131
        Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
   Politically these doctrines and predilections thus represent a
conservative bias, and particularly so in regard to questions of the
distribution of incomes and wealth. There were many radical
writers who insisted on studying social reality from the point of
view of the equality ideal. But the main line of development of
economic theory was laid out by writers who were inclined to turn
their interest away from this issue.
   And there is an explanation for this. As long as economic think-
ing had a metaphysical foundation and a teleological intent—as it
very definitely had among the classical economists, and to a large
extent still has among contemporary economists—there ruled an
arbitrary but effective principle of historical selection, which I have
referred to as founded upon ‘“‘the realism of conservatism’’.?
The conservatively inclined writers, steered in their analysis by a
conception of an ideal society more like the one we see, could
often deliver a superior explanation of social reality in causal
terms. This theoretical superiority of conservative thinking is, of
course, entirely fortuitous. It does not imply that conservative
political valuations are in any sense “‘true”’ or even “‘truer” than
the more radical ones.”
   Also, as I will exemplify in the next chapter, the basic illogicality
of normative and teleological reasoning—endeavouring to objectify
valuations, which cannot be done—represents a force persistently
driving the philosopher and the theorist to seek refuge in the
apparent simplicity of one version or another of Jazssez-faire.
These doctrines, if they are accepted, dispose of a host of awkward
queries which would raise their head as soon as the doctrines were
given up.
   These are explanations of the conservative twist of economic
theory in terms of logic. To look at the question from a different
point of view, that of the sociology of knowledge, it strikes the eye
  * The Political Element   in the Development of Economic      Theory, pp.   31 et

pat he way to free our thinking from this and other irrational influences from
the political sphere is to work with explicit value premises. Conservative con-
clusions, or other conclusions, will then be seen to emerge not out of pure theory,
but from the fact that reality is studied from certain points of view, which are
defined independently of the theory.
                                       132
                      The Equality Doctrine
immediately that all our economic speculation was for a long time
almost exclusively cultivated in the social setting of the then most
prosperous country, Great Britain. Thereafter, and until very
recently, it was developed further by theorists who, almost without
exception, were nationals of those few countries which were
rapidly progressing economically under conditions of expanding
mutual trade and large movements of capital and labour. And
in these countries, all higher culture, including the rise of
economic science, was concentrated at the centres of economic
expansion.
   These facts have clearly been of importance in the selection of
viewpoints, and thereby also in setting the approaches for econo-
mic theory. What I am suggesting is that economic theory, as it
developed, was to some extent a rationalisation of the interests and
the aspirations of the milieu where it grew.
   The escapist tendencies of economic theory as far as the equality
postulate is concerned become in this light comprehensible. Still
less should it be surprising that, in particular, the problems peculiar
to the under-developed countries tended to fade out in a pale
distant haze—until in recent years they were forcefully pressed
upon the world by the political and spiritual revolt of the peoples
living there. All this is indeed understandable, once one places
oneself outside this main trend of economic speculation and looks
on its development as a part of social history which needs to be
explained in terms of cause and effect like everything else which has
happened.
   The real mystery, which I am not in the position to solve in this
context but have to take as independently given, is the opposite
fact of the always clear presence and relative power of the equality
doctrine. Where did this lofty ideal come from? And how could
it continuously preserve its position at the basis of economic theory
and our entire culture?
   From one point of view the persistent tendency of economic
theory to take special precautions not to draw practical policy
inferences from the equality doctrine, and the whole involved
system of theoretical constructions built up to insulate the
                                 133
       Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
equality   doctrine   in an   abstract   compartment,   is a sort of
backhanded recognition of the sovereignty of this ideal. In a
sense, economic theory had its entire structure determined by
the need to protect it from the revolutionary ideal which was at
its very basis.




                                  134
                             CHAPTER     10


  THE CONSERVATIVE PREDILECTIONS OF
ECONOMIC THEORY AND THEIR FOUNDATION
       IN THE BASIC PHILOSOPHIES

 Antidotes to the Equality Doctrine
    The philosophies of natural law and utilitarianism, which had
 instilled in economic theory the ultra-radical equality doctrine, at
 the same time furnished it with the perfect antidotes: a whole set
 of doctrines designed to render the equality doctrine harmless.
These doctrines are all variations on a single theme: that on the
whole—and with a number of reservations—everything will come
out to the satisfaction of all if the natural forces of the market are
given free play which, of course, also implies that it is more
permissible to forget about the equality postulate.
    Such useful logical miracles can be expected from our philo-
sophies and theories as long as they are metaphysical. Almost by
necessity and not only by choice alone, people live in moral
compromise, and this implies also a considerable logical confusion;
in such a situation, what they demand from their philosophies and
theories as from their religions is precisely antidotes to their ideals.
On the other hand, the capacity of metaphysical notions to assist
in creating a semblance of harmony in thoughts and feelings, where
there is in fact disharmony, and to give psychological rationalisa-
tion to opportunistic interests is, at the same time, the explanation
of the fact that it has proved so difficult to drive out metaphysics
from our thinking. Metaphysics serves a purpose: it meets our
need for rationalisation.
  In the course of time the doctrines tended to evaporate into
what I have called predilections. The ability of these vague
inclinations to survive, and to continue to exert their influence,
was based on people’s opportunistic interest in escaping from
the equality doctrine.    Their resistance to logical criticism is
                                  135
          Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
undoubtedly also due to the fact that as doctrines they had once been
firmly rooted in the philosophies which still provide the general
form for our inherited economic theory.

Harmony of Interests
   The notion of harmony of interests is a basic predilection in
economic theory. It is certainly a comforting thought for those
who have drawn a lucky number in life’s lottery.
   The idea was a clearly perceived conviction in the philosophy of
natural law which served as the basis for the first general economic
theory some two hundred years ago.
   In utilitarianism, which soon took over the function of the philo-
sophical basis for economic theory, this assumption of an existing
harmony of interests became a more involved matter, and was
often hidden away in tacit assumptions and sometimes explicitly
renounced on the level of general principles as, for instance, by
Bentham. And many of the theoretical approaches of the classi-
cal economists in England were based on a recognition of conflict-
ing interests as, for example, Ricardo’s theory of distribution.
   But in the end, even in the economic thinking based on utili-
tarianism, the notion of a harmony of interests inserted itself in the
practical and political conclusions as a major predilection. Foritwas
inherent and logically necessary in the very attempt of the utilitar-
ians to explain both actual behaviour and a moral behaviourin terms
of the hedonistic mechanism of the sensations of pleasure and pain.
   At bottom this was also an identification between “‘what is” and
“what ought to be” and, as in the philosophy of natural law, such
an identification assumes a harmony of interests in society: the
differences in real life between an actually perceived utility and
the morally correct one had to be explained as a ‘“‘miscalculation of
chances’’—this expression is Bentham’s. Without the assumption
of a harmony of interests, the empirical philosophy of utilitarianism
would lose its claim to objectivity.?
   The further fact that the utilitarians could not in practice carry
out the social calculus of pleasure and pain—which was their
   “ The Political Element in the Development of Economic   Theory, pp. 44, 48 et
passim.
                                      136
                   Predilections of Economic Theory
proclaimed method of empirically determining those policies which
gave as a result the maximum “general welfare’’—by necessity
brought this assumption of harmony up from the level of episte-
mology to the level of practical discussion in connection with
various topical political issues.!_ For, if identity of individual
interests could be assumed, there would be no need to ascertain
them precisely and add them together in a sum for the whole
society; the conditions for the maximisation of this sum was given
independently of such calculations. However, on this level, the
assumption was, then as now, often hidden as an implicit link in
the chain of argument.
   In both these closely related philosophies, from which all our
modern economic and social theory has branched out, it was
stressed that social institutions as they functioned when under the
influence of state “interferences”, prevented the natural harmony
of interests from becoming realised. ‘The entire discussion
between the more radical and the more conservative writers for
two centuries, when it is brought to the pivotal point, turns around
the question of what, and how much, prior institutional change
would be necessary to bring society to the natural state of harmony
of interests.2, Even Marx is no exception to this generalisation,
though his major interest became focused on the dynamic process
as society moved from one stage to another and not on the end
result.
   It was, however, mainly the conservatives who came to deter-
mine the development of economic theory. As I mentioned at the
end of the last chapter, the fate of their theories profited from the
accident that they happened to be conservative; for this implied
that they were interested in a natural state of harmony which, to
them, was fairly like the world they saw. Their teleological
analysis of social reality became therefore more easily acceptable
because it mirrored the status quo. This is what I referred to as the
“realism of conservatism’.
   Today we might feel ourselves far from the confident faith of the
old philosophers in an intrinsic harmony of interests in the
  1 Thid., pp. 43 et passim.           2 Ibid., pp. 71 ff., 106ff. et passim.
                                 137
        Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
world as we see it, or as it would be after certain purifying
reforms. But if we scrutinise carefully the way we are apt to
formulate and motivate our most general policy opinions in regard
to their expected effects, or if we similarly analyse leading articles
in the press, party programmes and speeches during an election
campaign, or a debate in the General Assembly of the United
Nations, and likewise if we search our own economic theories, and
ask for an explanation why they approach problems in the way
they do, and if we then succeed in keeping the distance necessary
to discern the broad pattern of our reasoning, we shall be surprised
to find what a powerful hold over our thinking this old doctrine
of the harmony of interests has maintained.

Laissex-faire
   Another but slightly different predilection, closely related to the
interest harmony doctrine, is the anti-state and, indeed, the
“anti-organisation’’ bias or, as it is usually known, the lazssez-faire
inclination.
   In both the philosophy of natural law and of utilitarianism,
atomistic individualism was a conscious assumption, stressed in
protest against earlier and contemporary philosophies which
tended to give to the state and other collective bodies an organic
nature and, indeed, a kind of personality with independent, if
limited, interests, rights and duties. The hedonistic psychology
was thus implied already in the philosophy of natural right; in the
empiricist utilitarian philosophy it was elaborated and laid down
as the basis for the whole endeavour of calculating the ‘“‘general
welfare” as a sum of individual interests. The specific political
bias to which I refer springs from the fact that this calculation was
made upon the further assumption—or adjusted to fit the further
assumption—of interest harmony in society.
   To the physiocrats as the early exponents of the philosophy of

   1The prolific modern “welfare economics” moves inescapably under the
same spell, attempting by individualistic psychology to reach a metaphysical
goal, determined   in advance   by the predilections   and, more   particularly, the
harmony doctrine, which is logically inherent, as otherwise the objectivity of the
welfare notion would be lost; see above.
                                       138
               Predilections of Economic Theory
natural law the laissez-faire bias was programmatic: to them the
explanation why the “natural order’’ of the harmony of individual
interests did not materialise in full perfection, was mainly the
“interferences” of the state and other collective bodies. As I
pointed out in Chapter 4, in their time the state and its institutional
sub-structure of organised interests was also not of the type our
modern ‘“‘welfare state” is approaching but might very generally
be characterised, instead, as an “‘oppressor state’.
   Bentham, unlike the physiocrats, started out with strong con-
demnation of the aprioristic metaphysics implied in the assumption
of natural laws and conceived of his own philosophical exertions as
the working out, on the basis of empirically ascertained sensations,
of general rules for public morals and legislation, i.e. interferences
by the state. In the economic field, the result of this—as of any
other attempt at founding moral and political views solely upon an
observation of facts—was, for reasons already suggested, a relapse
into the doctrine of a natural harmony of individual interests
which,   in its turn, carries an inextricable    anti-state and anti-
organisation bias. ‘This is more clearly the situation if the analysis
is focused on an ideal society not very different from the actual
one, which on the whole was Bentham’s approach and very de-
finitely the approach of those authors, all of them Bentham’s
followers, who, thanks to the “‘realism of conservatism’”’, came to
determine the main trend in the development of economic theory.
   To Marx, however, the society he saw was very far from ideal.
He analysed the inner contradictions of the early capitalistic society
around him. As a German scholar and, in particular, a student of
Hegel, the notion of a stable equilibrium never came to fetter his
mind; this undoubtedly helped him to demonstrate much original-
ity in his studies of the cyclical and structural changes. The
doctrine of harmony of interests he criticised vehemently. Indeed,
he attempted to view the whole of history as a sequence of class
struggles, each one differently staged because of the changing
modes of production; he dealt with the state as the instrument of
oppression by the ruling classes. But with all that, Marx ended
with the sweet anarchistic vision of the ‘‘state of liberty” attained
                                 39
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
when, after the final revolution of the proletariat, the state would
have ‘‘withered away”. Apart from the controversial questions of
the correct exegesis of these statements, the significant thing is
that Marx never worked out a system of organised economic
policies to be carried out after the revolution: the notion of
“economic planning’, now recognised as one of the true shib-
boleths of socialism, did not play any important role in his thinking.
   No one in the entire tradition of economic speculation, as this
speculation developed after the Enlightenment, not even the
critics of our social order and our social theories, seems to have
escaped altogether this common predilection for individualistic
atomism in theory and anti-state and anti-organisation bias in
practical conclusions. Our modern thinking has on the whole been
developed by theorists who, with all their facilities, usually did not
have the revolutionary intellectual will and the ability of a Bentham
or a Marx to view from a distance the old theories they had
inherited and to dare original constructions of their own. We
should therefore not be surprised to find that recent economic
thinking has also tended to remain within the bounds of these
vague predilections.
   As our research resources have increased we have been able to
expand tremendously our empirical knowledge of social and political
institutions; but our general economic theories, even, and not least,
in their econometric diffusion into the less accessible corners from
Walras, Jevons and Edgeworth onwards, have largely remained
faithful to the old predilections. This is of particular importance,
since general theories have always had a closer relation to policy
prescriptions than empirical studies. Empirical studies of the
institutions have meanwhile, in this climate of basic intellectual
predilections, mostly either shown a tendency to adjust them-
selves to theory or remained strangely pointless.

The Free Trade Doctrine
  The free trade doctrine, which I mention here as the third of the
main predilections of economic theory, is usually presented as a
conclusion from theoretical analysis; in reality it is, however, the
                                 140
                 Predilections of Economic Theory
matrix in which the entire analysis has been moulded. It is a more
specific corollary of the assumption of harmony of interests and
expresses that assumption’s inherent anti-state and anti-organisa-
tion bias. All these general ideas are interlocking; they are indeed
only differently adapted modalities of the same dominant structural-
isation of thought which I am here trying to characterise.
   The practical triumph of the free trade doctrine is the fact that
even the severest critics of the general policy line of non-inter-
ference usually find it difficult to free themselves from its fascina-
tion.! Thus the motivation for an interference in production or
trade is ordinarily presented not simply as a means to an end but
in the form of reasons why, under special circumstances, an excep-
tion from the free trade doctrine should be accepted.
  The free trade doctrine, in fact, has been allowed to set the
terms of reference not only for the theory of international trade
and commercial policy but, more generally, for all discussion of
state or group interferences in the economic life of a nation. The
burden of proof is always supposed to lie with the interventionist.
   In point of logic this is, indeed, somewhat astonishing. As a
theory the free trade doctrine is not tenable.? Apart from this—
and accepting for the sake of argument that the doctrine is valid in
some sense—the practical free trade postulate, as presented by the
theorists when emerging from their analysis, is always equipped
with a large number of abstract assumptions and reservations.
The question then arises what a general practical postulate for
concrete action really means when it is delimited by abstract
assumptions and reservations.
   One of the assumptions is particularly awkward: free competi-
tion. Such a situation has never existed and the actual trends are
to move society ever further away from it. Generally it is not even
possible to decide whether a particular policy measure in a parti-
cular country would bring us nearer to, or take us further away
from, the purely fictitious state of free competition.
   Why, then, in pure logic, should a policy of inaction be given the

  1 The Political Element in the Development of Economic Theory, pp. 104 ff.
  2 Ibid., pp. 129ff.                   3 Ibid., pp. 134 ff.
                                      141
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
benefit of doubt? Why should the free trade doctrine be the one
idea to be allowed to set the stage? Why should interferences be
judged by the criterion whether they are justified as exceptions?
Why should not the rule be simply that, as always, we should be
careful to have our facts straight and our reasoning correct in terms
of means and ends? ‘These were questions I raised thirty years ago,
and further study and experience have only confirmed me in my
critical thoughts.

The Equilibrium Concept
   A closing link in the system of inherited doctrines and pre-
dilections in economic theory is the concept of stable equilibrium.
In Chapter 1 I counted to the credit of the equilibrium notion that
it represents a convenient means to comprehend and demonstrate
in a simple fashion the universal inter-dependence of all the factors
in the economic system, and also, that it constitutes an almost
indispensable logical step in many economic arguments.
  Together with some other assumptions, the assumption of stable
equilibrium has, however, also a function to fill as a necessary
device when giving expression and logical “‘proof” to the doctrines
and predilections analysed in this chapter, for instance to the free
trade doctrine. The equilibrium concept has therefore in the meta-
physical framework of ourinherited economictheory retainedateleo-
logical significance above the simple and technical purpose of being
a chosen theoretical tool useful for the analysis of social reality.
   The notion of stable equilibrium has also run through our whole
economic and social speculation during the past two hundred
years, and has up to this day determined the main concepts of all
the social sciences and not only economics. From what I have
said it becomes understandable why there has always been an urge
to give a positive value connotation to the state of equilibrium—as
two hundred years ago to the natural order, which from this point
of view is only a special case—and to give a negative one to dis-
equilibrium or “‘disorganisation”, ‘“maladjustment’’, “social lag”’
and “crisis”, to mention only a few of the near-synonyms adopted
in the different social science disciplines.
                                 142
                Predilections of Economic Theory
   Reality was assumed normally not to be in equilibrium. The
doctrine is, however, that equilibrium nevertheless had a “virtual
reality” as the state towards which actual reality, despite all dis-
turbances, ever tended to move. This virtual equilibrium state
could at the same time be utilised as a norm in forming value
judgments concerning actual reality. This was the way of thinking
of the physiocrats and the classical authors, and the idea reached its
most comprehensively elaborated refinement in the neo-classical
general equilibrium theory.
   Knut Wicksell used to point out, however, that there are many
alternatively possible equilibrium concepts which could be useful
in theoretical analysis. That used in economic equilibrium
analysis of the classical type is only one of these: the stable equili-
brium which may be illustrated by the hanging pendulum or a ball
at the bottom of a bowl and which, if attained and not further
disturbed, would imply that things remained motionless.
   One of the other equilibrium notions can be illustrated by a
cylinder rolling on a plane surface: it may come to rest anywhere; if
friction were entirely absent it would continue to roll in the same
direction with unchanged speed, and that movement would then
be its equilibrium.
   A third equilibrium notion is the “‘labile state” of balancing
forces in which a pencil would remain, if one succeeded in placing
it upright, on its end; pushing it over would, however, cause an
accelerated movement away from the original state of balancing
forces.
   Many of the theoretical advances in economics in the last two
generations have, as a matter of fact, been made by departing from
the inherited stable equilibrium notion.           Large portions of
Keynesian and post-Keynesian analysis—though not the general
theoretical framework—have this character. Wicksell’s analysis of
the cumulative and accelerating process away from monetary
equilibrium when the ‘“‘natural”’ rate of interest came to differ from
the market rate, is another example, and an earlier one.
   Even before this, Marshall’s theory of external economies and,
indeed, much earlier analysis of increasing returns, had reached
                                 143
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
outside the field dominated by the notion of stable equilibrium.
The earliest classical authors themselves had, besides their short-
term equilibrium theory, an analysis of long-term economic
development—in fact they had more of it than the neo-classical
authors—and part of it went far outside the framework of equili-
brium analysis. The present lively discussion on the economic
development of under-developed countries, including the building
of dynamic models, also often moves outside the theoretical
framework of the stable equilibrium approach.
   In recent decades much effort has gone into systematic attempts
to build up a dynamic economic theory. In these new approaches
the stable equilibrium notion has by logical analysis been relativ-
ised and cut down to its proper significance as a very abstract,
almost crude, and usually unrealistic theoretical assumption.
   But the notion of a stable equilibrium is in our tradition much
more than a theoretical assumption: it is a hardened and sturdy
predilection, and this is the explanation why, in spite of all the
critical onslaughts, it has retained much of its hold over our
theoretical approaches, often more than we find it convenient to be
fully conscious of. In particular, the huge and dominating structure
of the theory of international trade has in the most part stubbornly
remained an equilibrium theory. This is, as I shall discuss further
in the next chapter, a principal reason why it cannot provide the
basis for a valid theory of under-development and development,
and of international inequalities.
   The stable equilibrium notion, even when it is no longer held
consistently as a doctrine, has thus remained a scientific bias
steering our theoretical approaches. It contains, and is animated
by, all the other main predilections of economic theory mentioned
above: the idea of interest harmony, the anti-state and ‘“‘anti-
organisation” inclination, and the free trade presumption.

A Blind Spot
   I have characterised these predilections of economic theory as
antidotes to the equality doctrine placed at the basis of this theory.
No logical conciliation is possible: the conflict becomes hidden by
                                 144
               Predilections of Economic Theory
the suppression of the equality doctrine. As an exemplification of
this general rule, and as an introduction to the next chapter dealing
with the theory of international trade, some short comments may
be appropriate concerning the blind spot developed by classical
economists in England in regard to the interests of foreign nations.
    An essential element of the equality doctrine was, of course, the
assertion common to both the philosophers of natural law and the
utilitarians that, in calculating the general welfare, everyone should
be counted as one and nobody as more or less than one. To this
principle corresponds the aspiration of these philosophies, and also
of economic theory as it developed in the end of the eighteenth
and the beginning of the nineteenth century, to be general philo-
sophies and theories. Indeed, the determination to tolerate no
national limitations to their thinking was one of the intellectual
ambitions of the writers of this epoch which represented its glory
and which entitles it to be remembered as the Age of Enlighten-
ment. It distinguished all their speculation from most of what had
gone before.
    One of the implications of this way of thinking is, naturally, that
the concern of economic theory must be the interests—at bottom
 the “pleasures” and “‘pains’”—of human beings in general all over
 the globe. It would not be logically compatible with the philo-
 sophical foundations of economic theory that its concern should be
 confined to the interests of the members of any particular national
 branch of mankind. In principle this is evident and was seen to be
 evident; it was never explicitly denied by writers in the great
 classical tradition. For two hundred years it has given a cosmo-
 politan flavour to our most abstract concepts and pronouncements
in economics.
    In a queer way, however, the equality doctrine, insofar as it con-
cerned international relations, was from the beginning almost
entirely blotted out from practical attention and much more com-
pletely so than it ever was in regard to purely national issues. A
sort of opportunistic blind spot developed to serve this purpose.
 As Professor Lionel Robbins has rightly pointed out, it would be
     1 The Theory of Economic Policy, Macmillan, London,   1952, pp. 9ff.
                                    145
       Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
difficult to find a single case where English classical economists
actually recommended that Britain should make a sacrifice for the
welfare of the rest of the world.     When, for instance, they recom-
mended free trade as a general policy, it was not on the ground
that free trade would be to the good of the world but because it
would be in the interest of their own country.
   The important point I want to stress is that the English classical
economists, when tackling international economic problems, did
not set as their highest moral and political notion directing their
analysis the welfare of mankind, but rather the welfare of the
British nation. Out of their basic philosophies and their abstract
value theories, the former procedure would, however, have been
the logically correct one. In choosing the narrower welfare cri-
terion they acted against their own very explicit basic principles,
and it thus becomes understandable why their writings are so
evasive on this point.
   On a very general plane, we have here also an illustration of the
functioning of the free trade doctrine as a means of psychological
rationalisation.   For, if it can be assumed that free trade would also
be in the interest of all other countries as well as of Britain—as a
general proposition, and with many exceptions of which the litera-
ture takes due account without letting them influence the general
doctrine—the choosing of the narrower welfare criterion would not
be damaging to anybody. And, indeed, it does not then become so
necessary to be too explicit about whose welfare was assumed to
be desirable in the analysis. ‘The free trade doctrine thus made it
more possible for classical economists to avoid exposing them-
selves and their readers to the existence of the blind spot in their
thinking.
   On a deeper emotional level, i.e. in the setting of the public
conscience in the advanced countries where the theory was being
developed, this blind spot is, of course, related to the traditional
callousness towards foreigners which I commented upon in the last
chapter and which the abstract speculations during the Enlighten-
ment period and later did not change very much.

                                    146
                               CHAPTER      II


            A NOTE ON THE THEORY OF
              INTERNATIONAL TRADE
          AND THE INEQUALITY PROBLEM

Factor Price Equalisation
   A study, however intensive, of the theory of international trade
would not provide much of an explanation in causal terms of how
the facts of international economic inequality have come into
existence, and why there is a tendency for the inequalities to grow.
On the contrary, this theory would have led one to expect that
international inequalities ought not to be as large as they are, and
that they should be shrinking rather than growing.
   “The fact that many under-developed countries do not derive
the advantages from modern transportation and commerce that
theory seems to demand is one of the most pertinent facts in the
present international situation and cannot be easily dismissed’’—
I am quoting from a recent paper by a Swedish economist, the
late Folke Hilgerdt,! whose outstanding contributions to our ideas
about the “‘network of international trade’? and related matters,
made when he was a member of the Economic Secretariat of the
League of Nations, are now classic texts.
   Hilgerdt refers to the fact that huge movements of labour and
capital from Europe have transformed the plains in the temperate
belts into “‘white man’s land” with rapid and sustained economic
development and high and rising levels of living. ‘“Yet the gradual
filling of the ‘empty spaces’ has not reduced the pressure of
population in, for instance, Asia’s over-populated regions where
labour is most abundant.” For more than a quarter of a century
large-scale movements of factors of production have now almost
    1 “Uses and Limitations of International Trade in Overcoming Inequalities
 in World Distribution of Population and Resources”, World Population Con-
ference, Rome, 1954; to be published.
                                     147
        Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
stopped. But Hilgerdt’s point is that, even in the era when such
movements did take place, they did not function as a force for
equalisation.
   Let us remember,         however,     that according      to the classical
doctrine movements of labour and capital between countries would
not be necessary to bring about a development towards an equalisa-
tion of factor prices and, consequently, incomes. In fact, the
theory of international trade was largely developed on the abstract
assumption of the international immobility of all factors of pro-
duction. That trade itself initiated a tendency towards a gradual
and partial equalisation of factor prices in different countries, and
not only the price relations, was implicit already in the exposition
of the classical economists, though their method of stating the law
of comparative costs in terms of only a single factor, labour—
which, however, could have different “‘qualities’—turned the
emphasis in other directions.
   In Eli F. Heckscher’s paper on the equalising influence of trade on
factor prices and Bertil Ohlin’s restatement of the classical theory
of international trade in terms of a general equilibrium theory of
the Lausanne school type and his further development of Heck-
scher’s thoughts on the equalisation of factor prices, trade appears
even more clearly as a substitute for, or an alternative to, factor
movements. ‘The more explicit stress on the equilibrating and
equalising effects of international trade represents a main interest
in the new approach. ‘Trade would permit industrial activity to
adapt itself to the localisation of natural and population resources
in different regions and different countries. The result should
be that the relative scarcity of labour and capital become less
different.
   Upon this foundation there has in the post-war years been a
lively discussion between the econometricians elaborating—under
specific, abstract and static, conditions—the relative effectiveness

  1 Eli F. Heckscher, “The Effect of Foreign Trade on the Distribution of
Income”, Readings in the Theory of International Trade, selected by a com-
mittee of the American Economic Association, Allen & Unwin, London, 1950
(translation from the Swedish original of 1919); Bertil Ohlin, Inter-regional and
International Trade, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1933.
                                       148
        International Trade and the Inequality Problem
of this tendency to equalisation of factor prices in different coun-
tries as a result of international trade.1
   We thus see the strange thing that in recent decades, while
international economic inequalities have been growing and recently
also become of more and more pressing practical concern in
international politics, the theory of international trade has de-
veloped in the direction of stressing more and more the idea that
trade initiates a tendency towards a gradual equalisation of factor
prices and incomes as between different countries.
   The inadequacy of such a theory to explain reality cannot be
accounted for by pointing to the relative breakdown of the multi-
lateral trading system which functioned before the First World
War, a change which is related as both effect and cause to the
increase of restrictions on international trade and payments.
For, as Hilgerdt observed, a confrontation of the theory of inter-
national trade with the facts of international inequalities in the
period before 1914 reveals the same discord.

The Inadequacy of the Theory to Explain the Facts
   It is an understatement to say that the theory of international trade
does not furnish us with a model or logical mechanism representing
asystem of rational hypotheses which can be used for explaining
why and how the huge economic inequalities between different
countries have come to exist and why they tend to grow. This theory
has, instead, been given a twist, and—murabile dictu—in very recent
years increasingly so, in the direction of suggesting a situation
and a development trend quite contrary to the actual ones.
   Under these circumstances it should not surprise us that, on the
whole, the literature is curiously devoid of attempts to relate the
facts of international inequality and the problems of under-
development and development to the theory of international
trade. Hilgerdt could have made a claim to originality merely on
the ground of having posed this question in the paper I have cited.
   1 The recent discussion of the problem of factor price equalisation as a result
of international trade was initiated by Professor Paul A. Samuelson in two
articles in the Economic fournal, 1948 and 1949; for fuller reference see Svend
Laursen, ‘Production Functions and the Theory of International Trade”, The
American Economic Review, 1955, pp. 540 ff.
                                       149
       Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
  Professor Jacob Viner, the foremost exponent in our generation
of the great theoretical tradition of the classical economists, gave
his lectures in Brazil the provocative title: International Trade and
Economic Development!—but he did not raise this issue. Viner, in
fact, singles out the problem of economic development of under-
developed countries for separate discussion in a final chapter where
he makes many interesting, though rather disconnected, observa-
tions and suggestions about poverty. In that chapter he also
touches upon various international relations: gives reasons why
foreign capital will probably not be available on any large scale,
reassures the under-developed countries, perhaps a little too
readily, against any general adverse bias in the movement of their
terms of trade, and points to the possibility open to them, nota bene
with good fiscal and monetary management, of counteracting the
effects of the wide fluctuations in their export prices.
   But the theory of international trade appears only very occasion-
ally, and then in certain general pronouncements which seem
somewhat lost and out of place.? In the five earlier chapters he
renders a delightfully readable account of his, on the whole, ortho-
dox ideas about a host of problems in the international trade
field, but has astonishingly little to say about what the reader
would expect from the title of the book: the relation between trade
and development—except again in the form of intelligent innuen-
does scattered throughout the text.
   1'The Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1953.
   * For example: “In a predominantly agricultural country rapid growth of
population unaccompanied by proportionate growth in demand for its agri-
cultural products will under free-market conditions bring spontaneously into
action forces tending to industrialise the country, by making agricultural pro-
duction less remunerative.”’ (Ibid., p. 113.) This is a very inaccurate description
of what has actually taken place, and is taking place, in the under-developed
parts of the world.
   One particular point where thinking in terms of the equilibrium assumption
is entirely misleading, is the idea that ‘free-market conditions bring spontane-
ously into action forces” tending to equilibrate industry and agriculture.    As a
matter of fact, even if population growth and pressure on the land should
come to reduce marginal productivity of labour in agriculture to zero, labour
would not be available for industrialisation except for a wage which is—com-
paratively—high. Costs and prices in industry do not reflect real opportunity
(or displacement) costs. Furthermore, even if there are profits to be made in
industry, there are no entrepreneurs to seize the opportunity; or those, which
there are, have not the skill to do it so that the profit would be realised. Even
more fundamentally, the search for profit is not as universal a motive for human
                                       150
         International Trade and the Inequality Problem
Unrealistic Assumptions
   It is an interesting question to ask for an explanation of this
strange isolation of the theory of international trade from the facts
of economic life.
   A main explanation is undoubtedly that this theory in a higher
degree than any other part of economic speculation has kept faith-
ful to the heritage of the classical economists. I have already
referred to their blind eye for the international equality problem.
The inherited doctrines and predilections—the free trade doctrine,
the laissez-faire bias and the notion of harmony of interest—and
the system of static assumptions basic to those theoretical con-
structs have been given freer play in the theory of international
trade than anywhere else.
   The theory of international trade, and indeed economic theory
in general, was thus never developed to comprehend the reality of
great and growing economic inequalities and of the dynamic
processes of under-development and development. Economic
theory was, indeed, never focused on the problems connected with
big differences between techniques of production and, indeed,
between the productivity functions themselves, corresponding to
very great differences in the relative scarcity of factors of pro-
duction and to immense differences in standards of living and the
entire cultural setting.
   Also, the theory of international trade more than any other
branch of economic theory has been dominated by the assumption
of stable equilibrium, implying the belief that normally a change
will call forth as reaction secondary changes with an opposite

behaviour as the classics supposed; in under-developed countries the apprecia-
tion is, in particular, slight for that type of profit which accrues from sustained
production efforts and long-term capital investment. Viner may answer by
stressing that he assumes ‘‘free-market conditions” with a very inclusive
logical content; but the point is that such an assumption is totally unreal-
istic. Indeed, it remains an unanswered question what precisely this assumption
means in the actual cultural, social, psychological and economic conditions in
under-developed countries; if this question is not answered—and I believe it
cannot be answered—this whole way of thinking remains meaningless; and it
becomes wrong if any inferences as to reality are drawn. Viner probably agrees
with this, for, as I point out in the text, he does not in fact attempt any consistent
use of any theory in his treatment of the development problems of under-
developed countries.
                                         151
       Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
direction.   Only on this assumption—and, in addition, a number of
other assumptions—does trade represent an element in the
economic process which operates to bring about greater economic
equality between regions and countries.1 Under the contrary
and more realistic assumption, that more often the economic
process is cumulative because of circular causation, the role of
international trade becomes, as we have seen, rather the opposite
one of being one of the media through which the market forces
tend to result in increased inequalities when, as regularly in under-
developed countries, the spread effects are weak.
   There is another notion which joins with the equilibrium
assumption in isolating the theory of international trade from the
facts of international inequalities and the dynamic problems of
under-development and development, namely the distinction
between “economic” factors and “non-economic” ones. The
non-economic factors have much to do with what the classical
economists referred to as “qualities” of the productive factors
and, consequently, the “effectiveness” of production in various
lines.
   The classical economists cannot be accused of having over-
looked the importance of the non-economic factors. Indeed Viner,
to whom I have referred as the most prominent modern author in
the great classical tradition, criticises Heckscher and Ohlin for
disregarding those aspects and continues:

   1 This criticism—in its negative form that the equilibrium assumption and
the theoretical approach which it represents are unrealistic—is, of course,
anything but original, as I stressed in the last chapter. It has also often been
pointed out that the theory of international trade, more than any other part of
economic theory, has stubbornly remained an equilibrium theory. Professor
John W. Williams, in his preoccupation with the relation between economic
policy and theory, has observed as one of the greatest paradoxes of recent times
that, “‘while since 1914 the world has been in a state of profound and virtually,
continuous disturbance, formal international trade theory has continued to
emphasise equilibrating tendencies” (Economic Stability in a Changing World,
Oxford University Press, 1953, p. 24); indeed “‘the main drift in theory, until
recently at least, seems to have been towards further emphasising equilibrating
tendencies—whether through refinements on the classical analysis, or through
the one of more modern value theory, or by introducing more countries and
commodities.      ... The so-called ‘modern’ or Keynesian approach has carried
this emphasis even further through its analysis of international trade adjustment
in terms of income.” (Jbid., p. 29.)
   @Wbid.s py 10:
                                       152
       International Trade and the Inequality Problem
     It is incumbent on the economist . . . to recognise and to pro-
  claim that economic improvement is not merely a matter of more
  capital, or more acres, or more coal in the ground, but also of
  growth of effectiveness of management               and of manual effort
  through better education, better health, better motivation, and
  better political and social organisation. If he fails to do so, he is
  liable to find himself throwing the blame for national poverty
  wholly on physical circumstances beyond human remedy, or on
  factors external to that economy, to the neglect of the internal
  human, social, political and moral factors which may carry a
  large part of the true responsibility.

   It is undoubtedly in this sphere of the “qualities” of the pro-
ductive factors and, consequently,            the “effectiveness”       of pro-
duction in various lines that a main part of the theoretical explana-
tion has to be sought of why countries have fared so unequally in
their development and why international trade has not been active
as an equalising force. But lumping those things together under a
single, abstract, vague concept and mostly dealing with this lump
as a solid, static entity means precisely keeping them outside the
analysis, i.e. abstaining from seeking the theoretical explanation
demanded by establishing the inter-relationships also with the
non-economic factors. And occasional references to individual
elements within this lump, and to their changes do not constitute
a systematic explanation, linking economic development to
economic theory, but represent rather a reversion to the indis-
criminate ‘“‘all case’? method of the German historical school,
which Viner least of all might be expected to find to his liking.
   To define a certain set of phenomena as the “economic factors’,
while keeping other things outside the analysis, is a procedure
closely related to the stable equilibrium approach. For it is pre-
cisely in the realm of those “non-economic factors”, which the
theory of international trade usually takes as given and static, that
the equilibrium assumption is most unrealistic and where instead
circular causation is the rule.?
   1 Already in an important paper during the late ’twenties, ‘“The Theory of
International Trade Reconsidered’’, Williams made the points that ‘‘the classical
theory assumes as fixed, for purposes of the reasoning, the very things which...
should be the chief objects of study if what we wish to know is the effects and
                                      153
        Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
Effects on the Discussion of Under-development and Development
   The theory of international trade and its inherent ideological
predilections have also had, of course, their influence—to some
extent and more or less by implication—on the discussion in recent
years of economic under-development and development.
   The facts of international economic inequalities, and of their
tendency to increase are awkward from the point of view of this
theory, which had turned its back on these phenomena and even
suggested that international trade had equalising effects. This
discord between facts and theory has not generally been stressed.
Nor, in the discussion of under-development and development, has
there been much of a consistent attempt to pose as a main problem
the explanation of the inequalities and their tendency to increase.
Even today, when these facts are highlighted by the rising inter-
national political tension, there is clearly an inclination to steer the
discussion into other aspects of the problems of the under-developed
countries than those related to international economic inequalities.
   Similarly, this tendency inherent in international trade theory
has an interesting parallel in the type of discussion carried on in
the developed countries about the commercial policies of under-
developed countries.       ‘The advice most often given to the
under-developed countries—that they should avoid tampering with
trade and payments—and also the pressures exerted upon their
commercial policies by means of the policies of the developed
countries themselves, are determined without much recognition
of the dynamics of international economic inequalities.
   Instead, most advice to the under-developed countries, and the

causes of international trade, so broadly regarded that nothing of importance in
the facts shall fail to find its place in the analysis’; and that ‘‘the relation of
international trade to the development of new resources and productive forces
is a more significant part of the exploration of the present status of nations, of
incomes, prices, well-being, than is the cross-section value analysis of the classi-
cal economists, with its assumption of given quota of productive factors, already
existent and employed’’. (Economic Journal, 1929, pp. 195 ff.) In the history of
economics, the honour of having early exposed the fallacy of assuming factor
endowments as given, belongs, of course, to Friedrich List. It is interesting to
note that List exerted a great influence particularly in America—at the time when
America was also an “‘under-developed”’ country, though in another sense, as it
had a very much higher level of income per head than those countries we now
characterise as under-developed.
                                        154
       International Trade and the Inequality Problem
pressures exerted upon them, are commonly rationalised in terms
of a theory of international trade founded upon assumptions
unrealistic so far as these countries are concerned. And the inter-
national organisations in the field of trade—the International
Monetary Fund, the now defunct International Trade Organisa-
tion, and its remnant GAT’T—tend continuously to be permeated
by the ideological elements which I have referred to as the pre-
dilections of economic theory, and which have had a particularly
strong influence on the theory of international trade.
   The systematic bias which is at work in so many of our intel-
lectual endeavours in connection with international policy prescrip-
tions for the under-developed countries is founded on the fact that
the stable equilibrium approach is most often permitted to be the
dominant one, and the further fact that the equilibrium concept is
ideologically tied to the hardy old predilections of harmony of
interests, aissez-faire and free trade. It is imbued with a telos and
with objectified,   and thereby hidden,    valuations:   it is seldom
merely a theoretical tool, chosen with full awareness of its complete
arbitrariness from a policy point of view.
   I observed in Chapter 7 that the paramount need for compre-
hensive state planning of economic development in under-
developed countries is now generally recognised, not only in those
countries themselves, but also by practically all economists and
political representatives of the advanced countries. State economic
planning and state interferences on a large scale to effectuate the
planning are understood to be necessary, as economic stagnation
must be broken and this will not happen if nothing is done
to bring it about. But very apparently, this recognition of a
political necessity is in many quarters given only grudgingly.
And when it comes to giving effect to this general policy, all
sorts of arguments for slipping away into laissez-faire raise
their heads. This is particularly true in the field of foreign trade
and payments where also the developed countries’ interest in
status quo is at stake.
   The equilibrium approach with its strong traditional ideological
connotations then comes in as convenient and opportune. for,
                                 155
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
while a realistic approach recognising the predominance in social
development of circular causation having cumulative effects, gives
arguments for state planning of economic development in an under-
developed country and large-scale state interferences, the equili-
brium approach, because of its ideological connotations, tends to
lead to laissez-faire conclusions.
   When all this is said, however, it should be emphasised that on
the whole the large and rapidly growing literature on the economic
problems of the under-developed countries has paid little attention
to economic theory generally or to the theory of international trade
in particular. In its present stage this literature has on the whole a
somewhat untheoretical slant. Indeed, at its best, it seeks validity by
keeping close to the ground of concrete facts and practical problems.
   Most writers in this field express the desire for a theoretical
framework; but this yearning is usually qualified by scepticism,
sometimes amounting to total disbelief that we shall ever have a
general theory of economic under-development and development.

The Front against Iconoclasm
   So far I have referred to the theory of international trade as if it
were a single comprehensive system of thought which has to be
rejected zn toto, if the system is not accepted. Fortunately for my
scientific conservatism, this is not the case. The system of thought
I have criticised is actually a matrix of a large number of special
theorems, most of which can be reshaped and fitted to other
systems founded upon other assumptions.
   This treasure of economic theorems has been steadily increased
by the labour of many generations of theoreticians. Karl Menger
once stressed that our science has been built up by scholars who
mostly grudged themselves the leisure to reflect upon their own
thinking, and to question its logical foundation. And in the same
spirit Knut Wicksell pointed out as the sign of a good economist
that to a large extent he rises above the methods and assumptions
he uses. On the basis of metaphysical notions and dominated
by the opportunistic predilections, which I have attempted to
characterise above, economists in every generation, beginning with
                                   156
      International Trade and the Inequality Problem
the classical writers, have steadily increased our realistic know-
ledge about the world.
    It was not my purpose on this occasion to expound this accumu-
lated knowledge, but rather to demonstrate and explain what I also
believe to be true, namely that the theory of international trade
and, indeed, economic theory in general have never been developed
to comprehend the reality of great and growing economic in-
equalities and of the dynamic processes of under-development and
development. And for this reluctance of economic theory to deal
squarely with problems related to the equality issue, there are
explanations which should be brought to light if we want to free
economic theory from its present inhibitions.
   The fact that the theory now stands helpless when facing those
problems does not mean that it cannot be successfully applied to
other situations where there are no such great economic inequali-
ties. Even the stable equilibrium concept which, as I have argued,
is unrealistic when used for studying normal social processes,
might occasionally play a useful role in the study of some problems,
in particular when only a short period is under consideration.
   And as I said, most of the special theorems which make up the
bricks of the big structure, the design of which I cannot accept,
can with great advantage be utilised in quite another structure.
Indeed, there are many of these theorems which do not fit too well
in the present structure but would fit excellently in the new one.
The development of the “infant industry” argument, and many
other special considerations already taken account of by classical
economists, particularly as presented in their discussion of practical
problems of the day, contained in nuce hints of a much more real-
istic approach to the problems of the under-developed countries.
   In recent decades much effort has also gone into connecting
developments in international trade with the cumulative processes
analysed in the framework of business cycle theory. Much of the
discussion around the “dollar gap”, as also concerning the impor-
tance for international trade and payments of demand and supply
elasticities—sometimes leading to the notion of the possibility of
“perpetual disequilibrium”—has also an unorthodox character.
                                 E57
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
   If ever we come nearer to the formulation of a general theory of
economic under-development and development, it would remain
a difficult but necessary task to integrate it into our general econo-
mic theory and, in particular, to make it and the theory of inter-
national trade consistent with one another. For, to hold logically
unconnected and, in fact, mutually inconsistent theories is hardly
a satisfactory state of affairs.
   To accomplish this integration would most certainly, on the one
hand, imply considerable adjustment and changes in general
economic theory. The changes would then reflect the progress in
our perception of the world economy attributable to the intensified
studies of the long-term problems related to the facts of economic
inequalities and the dynamic processes of under-developed and
development.
   On the other hand, the theory of under-development and
development, when once it is expounded, will not have been con-
structed simply out of a broad structural conception, like the one
I have tried to sketch in Part I, plus empirical data: as building
stones there will have been salvaged many familiar arguments and
theorems now harboured in the broad framework of our general
theories, including the theory of international trade, adjusted and
fitted into the new structure. In economics, as in social theory
generally, old thoughts are rarely discarded altogether, and no
ideas are entirely new and original.
   The changed political situation in the world, the compulsion,
implied in this changed political situation, to focus attention on
new and very different problems, and the appearance on the stage
of a host of new participants from nations which have until recently
been kept passively submissive and mute, are bound to represent
the beginning of a revolution also in the social sciences, widening
our horizon and radically redirecting our thinking. Out of this
mighty process should also emerge a more realistic and relevant
economic theory.
                            CHAPTER     12

      THE     LOGICAL        CRUX      OF    ALL    SCIENCE

 The Relation between the Moral and the Intellectual Discords
   When the facts of international economic inequalities and their
 tendency to grow are confronted with the state of public con-
science in the richer nations and with the economic theory which
 has developed in the cultural setting of those countries, discords are
brought into the open both in the moral and the intellectual spheres.
   Of these the moral discord is undoubtedly the fundamental one.
On the one hand, there is in these nations, on the general plane of
valuations, a common adherence to the ideal, inherited from far
back in history, of the right of all persons to equality of oppor-
tunity, irrespective of race and colour, religion and creed, social
status and nationality. On the other hand, in their daily life as
individuals and as citizens, people there are not, in fact, prepared
to take the consequences of this great moral principle, in a measure
which even remotely approaches completeness.
   Economic theory is only a segment of the total culture. It
becomes modulated to serve opportunistic rationalisation needs.
In order to live on as comfortably as possible with the moral
discord in their hearts, people there need an economic theory that
diverts attention from this moral discord.
   This need enhances the survival strength of those old doctrinal
predilections of economic theory which have an instrumental value
as antidotes to that theory’s own basic equality doctrine, and also of
such theoretical devices for “proving” those predilections as the
stable equilibrium approach, and the abstraction from the “non-
economic” factors. The combined effect of these tendencies in
economic theory—which are all logically related to each other, and
to the philosophies of natural law and utilitarianism from which
economic theory has branched off—has been, and is, to keep theory,
as far as possible, aloof from such facts and causal relations which,
                                 fae
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
if analysed, would focus attention on the economic inequalities as
between regions and countries and thus on the fundamental moral
discord.
   In this situation the untheoretical twist which we have observed
in the rapidly growing literature on the problems of the under-
developed countries would seem to be a sound reaction on the part
of those social scientists who are devoting their efforts to these
problems. Attempting to do without a general theory would seem
to be a safer course than using one that is biased and faulty.

The Logical Necessity of a Theory and the Need of Adjusting it to
   Facts
   It must be said, however, that theory is indispensable for
scientific work. Theory is necessary not only to organise the find-
ings of research so that they make sense but, more basically, to
determine what questions are to be asked. Scientific knowledge
never emerges by itself, so to speak, from empirical research in the
raw, but only as solutions to problems raised; and such solutions
presume a logically co-ordinated system of problems stated.
   Theory, therefore, must always be a priori to the empirical
observations of the facts. Facts come to mean something only as
ascertained and organised in the frame of a theory. Indeed, facts
as part of scientific knowledge have no existence outside such a
frame. Questions must be asked before answers can be obtained
 and, in order to make sense, the questions must be part of a logic-
ally co-ordinated attempt to understand social reality as a whole.
A non-theoretical approach is, in strict logic, unthinkable.
   Underlying and steering every systematic attempt to find out the
truth about society, there is therefore always a theory: a vision of
what the essential facts and the causal relations between them are.
This theory which determines the direction of research should
be made explicit. The danger of keeping the theory implicit—as
unstated reasons for asking the particular questions that are
asked, and organising the findings in the way they are actually
organised—is, of course, that it escapes criticism.
   If theory is thus @ priori, it is, on the other hand, a first principle
                                   160
                The Logical Crux of All Science
of science that the facts are sovereign. Theory is, in other words,
never more than a hypothesis. When the observations of facts do
not agree with a theory, i.e. when they do not make sense in the
frame of the theory utilised in carrying out the research, the
theory has to be discarded and replaced by another one which
promises a better fit.
    Theory and fact-finding research should thus be continually
readjusted to each other, on the principle, however, that in the
final analysis the facts are decisive. As the theory is merely a
hypothesis, the criterion of its truth can never be anything else
than the pragmatic one of its usefulness in bringing our observa-
tions of facts into a meaningful and non-contradictory system of
knowledge. And so scientific progress can be expected to result
by a process of trial and error.
    In the moral sphere, the corresponding logical process is moral
 criticism, proceeding on the assumption that there should be
 consistency between our valuations, a demand raised by feelings
 which are real because of the rationalism which is also part of our
 culture. As the valuations refer to social reality, and as therefore
 their inter-relations logically involve people’s beliefs concerning
 this reality, the process of correcting their theories to fit the facts
 plays at the same time an important role in the attempts to give
 clarity, honesty and consistency to their moral ideas: to purify
 and strengthen the public conscience.
   For people want to be rational. Scientific truth-seeking, by
rectifying their beliefs also influences their valuations. “In a
rationalistic civilisation it is not only that the beliefs are shaped
by the valuations, but also that the valuations depend upon the
beliefs.”’+

The Provenance of Truthful Theory
   For realism and relevance scientific research thus depends on
a major a priort: an insight into what the essential facts and causal
relations really are. This a priori theory then becomes corrected
in the course of research to fit ever closer the reality studied. But
               1 An American Dilemma, p. xiv; cf. pp. 1028 ff.
                                    161
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
from where, in the first place, is the a priori theory inferred?
Where is its fountain head?
   To take it from one’s own hunches is almost certain to be a
choice of one of the innumerable roads to unreality and irrelevance.
The theorist’s individual hunches do not even have the quality of
being random, which would at least preserve the possibility that
occasionally he would by pure chance strike upon what is essential
and thus be in a position to pose questions which truly reveal
reality and draw relevant inferences. For he is mostly, nolens
volens, under the impact of the inherited theory which tends to
serve as a vehicle for the predilections which | commented upon in
Chapter Io.
   The “purer” a theorist is, the more he seems to be under
the influence of the inherited predilections. The devotion of so
much theoretical effort even in recent decades to “welfare econo-
mics”—though it was conclusively proved long ago that this
approach is unrealistic and, in fact, without logical sense—is a
demonstration of this point.
   My next point is that there is no other rational way to reach that
insight into what is really essential, and which is indispensable for
the choice of variables for theory, than the cumbersome and
laborious one of comprehensive and intensive empirical social
science research. Only on the basis of a close contact with social
history and social knowledge generally can we hope to construct
the “model of the models” which can be used as the guide to
realism and relevance for our abstract theory.
   This basic empirical research would need to encompass social
facts and relations in all fields. In Chapters 1 and 3 I noted that
our traditional division of knowledge into separate and delineated
social science disciplines has no correspondence in reality: concrete
problems are never simply economical, sociological, psychological,
or political. A theory of under-development and development
which works only with “‘economic’’ variables is for logical reasons
doomed to be unrealistic and thus irrelevant.
  And this comprehensive social science research prior to the
construction of the abstract theory and needed for assuring it realism
                                  162
                The Logical Crux of All Science
and relevance, should be freed as far as possible from the powerful
predilections I have referred to. The general method to accom-
plish this is to work with explicit value premises, themselves tested
both as to relevance and significance.
   This comprehensive research, however, needs itself, from the
start and continuously as it proceeds, to formulate hypotheses in
order to direct the observations and ask the pertinent questions.
It needs theory. As I just stated, empirical knowledge cannot be
assembled and systematised without organising principles, i.e. an
insight into what are the essential facts and relations. Empirical
research needs in fact for its own pursuit a nucleus of the theory
which I am insisting can only be constructed on itself as a basis.

The Crux of all Science
   This is the logical crux of all science: it assumes in all its en-
deavours an a priori but its ambitions must constantly be to find an
empirical basis for this a prio. A worth-while theory of under-
development and development, if it can ever be formulated,
would have to be based on ideas distilled from the broadest
empirical knowledge of social change in all its manifold aspects,
acquired under the greatest freedom from tradition-bound pre-
dilections. Only thereby can the bold simplifications be safely
founded which can serve as the theoretical direction of research.
But the empirical knowledge itself cannot be acquired without
principles of selection and organisation, i.e. without a vision of a
theory.
   We are thus constantly attempting what in its perfection is
impossible, and we are never achieving more than makeshifts: these,
however, can be better or worse. In our present situation the task
is not, as is sometimes assumed, the relatively easy one of filling
“empty boxes” of theory with a content of empirical knowledge
about reality. For our theoretical boxes are empty primarily
because they are not built in such a way that they can hold reality.
We need new theories which, however abstract, are more realistic
in the sense that they are in a higher degree adequate to the facts.
   Meanwhile, I believe it to be a disciplining force in our dispersed
                                  163
      Economic Theory and Under-developed Regions
efforts in the field of under-development and development that
a clear concept of the ideal is constantly kept in mind and
given a directing role in all our research. To begin with, we need
to free ourselves from the impediment of biased and inadequate
predilections and unreal and irrelevant theoretical approaches
which in our academic tradition we are carrying with us as a heavy
ballast.
                                      Index
                   A                               Cuba, 68n
                                                   Culture and poverty,     67-9; and
Agricultural regions, poverty in, 29;                segregation, 58-9
   “‘protected”’ wages in, 95                      Cumulative expansion process, “‘blue-
1      ae ea         as moral element,               printing” of, 85 seqq.
  7   a,


A priori theory, sources of, 161-2, 163
Arab poverty, 5, 52, 77                                               D
Austerity as essential to new planning,
  82-3, 91-2, 94                                   Democracy, “‘restricted’’, 83
                                                   Dictatorship dilemma, 83
                                                   Discords, economic theory as diluter
                   B                                 of, 159-61
                                                   Disequilibrium synonyms,      142
“Backwash” and “‘Spread”’ effects of               “Disguised” unemployment, 55
  local economic expansion, 27-9,
  30-3, 54-5; see Italy
Bentham, J., 109, 136, 139, 140                                       E
Bevan, Aneurin, 46, 83, 83n
Birth control, 27, 85, 117, 118
Boom and Depression in regional                    Economic Surveys of Europe (U.N.),
   inequalities, 37-8                                33
“Bribe” and “Blackmail” in colonial-               Edgeworth, 110n, 140
                                                   Embree, Edwin R., 21n
  ism, 73-5                                        Empiricism, role of, 158, 160, 161-3;
“Business cycle” tradition, 38; see
  also Inherited economic theories                    in Social Science research, 162
                                                   “Enforced bilateralism”’, 58-9, 62
                                                   Engels, 19n, 43
                   Cc                              “Entrenched” economic theory, 158
                                                      seqq.
Capital movement, restricted role of,              Equalisation, dynamics of, 120-1;
  28, 53                                               “compromise” theory of, 118-20
Cassel, Gustav, 90n                                   poor countries’ resistance to, 6;
Circular causation: as main hypo-                     vested interests and, 122, 126
   thesis,   100 segg.; principle of,              Equality doctrine, 107-34; antidotes
   11-22; and dynamic social gains,                  to, 135-6; escape from, 107, inter-
   88; former colonies and, 57 seqq.;                national factors militating against,
   egalitarian   State  policies   and,               50-65; new phase in, 125; regional
  40-2; and “external        dis-econo-              factors militating against, 23-38;
  mies”, 35; and negative policies,                   State policies concerning, in richer
  71-5; and Negro problem illu-                      countries,   39-41
  stration, 14-16, 17-20; and regional             Equilibrium     concept,   role     of,   9,
  economic    inequalities,   23.   Seqq.;           142-4; see Stable equilibrium
  and tax rate, 24-5; non-economic
  factors in, 30-31; see 3-106 passim
Colonialism,    economic     results of,                              F
   55-7; play of forces in, 57-63
Colour bar, 54                                     Fertility rates, 84-5, 117, 118
Comparative costs, theory of, 94, 96,              Feudalism, 40, 42; in Sweden, 44
   148                                             Foreign exchange, planning and, 94,
“Conservative” realism, 132, 135-7                    97
                                             165
                                         Index
Free Trade, 95-6, 97, 100, 155;                     International Bank for Reconstruc-
  doctrine, and free competition,                     tion and Development, 64
   140-2; doctrine, as psychological                International Monetary Fund, 97
  rationalisation, 146, 151                         International trade theory, 147 seqq.;
                                                      isolation   of, from    economic         fact,
                                                       I51
                   G                                Israel, 5
                                                    Italy, ‘“‘backwash”      effects     in,    28,
                                                      28-9n
“GATT”;
     07;                153..
General welfare thesis, 109
“Great Awakening”, the, 7, 8, 79,                                      J
   IOI, III, 118, 125; young econo-                 Java, 68n
  mists and, 101-4                                  Jevons, S., 140


                   H                                                   K

Handicrafts, ousting of (cheap im-                  Keynes, J. M., 21-2, 130n, 143, 152n
  ports), 52                                        Kjellen, Rudolf, 113
“Harmony     of interests’  notion,                 Kuznets, Simon, 3n
   136-8,
      139, 141, 155
Heckscher, Eli F., 148, 148n, 152
Hilgerdt, Folke, 147-8, 149                                            iP
Hobbes, Thomas, 74
                                                    Labour migration, 30-1; see Mig-
                                                       ration
                                                    Laissez-fatre, 138-40, 155, 156; irre-
                   I                                   levance of, 100, 103, 117, 117;
                                                       and the physiocrats, 139; Ricardo
Ignorance, convenience of, 123-5                       and,     116,   117n; and  “spread
Illiteracy, 30, 84                                     effects’’, 39, 50
Import      and    export,    see    ‘Trade         Latin America, 4, 5, 6, 33, 63, 80n
   regulation                                       Laursen, Svend, 149n
Inaction, as rich countries’ weapon,                Lebanon, 5
   73                                               Libya, 62
Income: average, and social welfare,                Local taxation rate and ‘‘downward”’
   82; equalisation, limits to, 126-7                 cumulative process, 24-6
India, new nationhood of, 62                        Locke, J., 108
Individualistic atomism predilection
   138, 140
Indonesia and West Guinea, 77                                         M
Industrial cartels, international con-
   trol of, 65                                      Malthusian theories, 36, 116-18
Inequalities: international, 50 seqq.;              “Marginal utility” idea, 109
   drift towards economic in country,               Market forces, 40, 43, 48, 49, 50, 55
   23 seqq.; public conscience and,                   seqq.; and colonies, 59-63, Chs. 6
   Part II passim; theory of inter-                   and 7; free play theory, 131-2;
   national] trade and, 147 seqq.                     regional    inequalities    and,     26-9;
“Tnfant industry” argument, exten-                     ““welfare’’ State counteracting, 41
   sion of, 157                                     Marshall, Alfred, 119-20, 124, 128,
Inherited     economic     theories,    107            128n, 143-4
   seqq.; inadequacy of, 8-10, 99;                  Marx, Karl, 43, 102, 137, 139-40; see
   inherited predilections, 159-64                    also 15n, 19n
“Innate differences” belief, 112-14                 Menger, Karl, 156
Intelligence measurement, lessons of,               Migration, and regional inequalities,
   128                                                27-9,
                                                         51, 54
Intergovernmental organisations, sta-               Military strength, declining         impor-
   bility of, 64.                                      tance of, 75-6
                                              166
                                          Index
Mill, James, 109                                    Rationalisation, 89 seqq., 135
Mill, John Stuart, 115, 117, 118                    “Realism” of conservative approach,
Mises, Ludwig von, 89-90, 90n                         137, 139
                                                    “Real value” theory (Locke), 108
                                                    Redistribution problems, 116 seqq.;
                       N                              on international scale, 126-7
                                                    Regional inequalities, 39, Chs. 3, 4,
National economic planning, three                     passim
  purposes of, 92; and international                Research needs, 98-104
  trade, 92-4, 147 seqq.                            Ricardo, 96, 116-17, 118, 136
National parliament and_ regional                   Sy          Professor  Lionel,          145-
  equalisation policies, 45
National State policies, 66 seqq.; and              Rostow, W. W., 20, 20on
  economic planning 179 seqq.
Nationalism,      ‘“‘democratic”,    after
  colony liquidation, 60-61, Chs. 6,                                    S)
  7 passim; nationalism as integrator,
  7°-3
“Natural wages” theory (Ricardo),                   Samuelson, Professor Paul A., 149
   116-18                                           Says je B22
Negro, the ‘‘fighting’’, 67; problem,               Schumpeterian reversal, 80
   as illustration of circular causation,           “Settlers” privileges, 61
   14-16, 17-20                                     Social conscience, weak     role of,
Nurske, Professor Ragnar, 11, 11n                     70
                                                    Social    science        research,   127-30,
                                                      162-3
                       O                            Social security and regional equality,
                                                      46, 82; see Welfare State
Ohlin, Bertil, 148, 152                             Solidarity of under-privileged, 68-70;
Opportunist predilections, 151-4                      threat to, 73-5
Opportunity, increasing equality of,                a       orbit, real income levels in, 78,
                                                        Za
  46, 47, 50-51                                     “Spread effects”, and democratic
“Opportunity costs” in planning, 89
                                                       basis, 47, 51; conclusions concern-
                                                       ing, 39, 40; and expansionary
                       P                              momentum, 54-5, 58; and “social
                                                      chasms’’, 81
                                                    “Stable equilibrium” ideology, as
Political    independence,    economic                unrealistic assumption, 9-13; and
   corollaries to, 60-4                               international   trade,  151,  153,
Population pressures, 147; see also                    155-6; occasional usefulness of,
   Fertility, Birth Control                            157
Prebisch, Professor, 29n                            Stalin, J., death of, 78
Prices, manipulated, 49; price system,              State planning; egalitarian, 39 seqq.;
   operation of, 49, 89-91                             and oppression, 42-3; and ex-
Production-distribution      “evasion”,                ploiters, 44-5; controlled cumula-
   115-16                                              tive process in, 85-6; major pro-
Protection, local industries and, 94-5,                blems     of, 80-5;    as   “model”
  96, 97                                               (abstract), 85-6; necessity for, 79-
Public     services,   State responsibility            85; in real terms, 86-8
  for, 44, 45                                       Streeter, Paul, 107n
                                                    Sumner, W., 15n
                                                    “Sunfed” ideal, 64-5
                       R                            “Supply and Demand”’ fallacies, 49,
                                                      90-91
Racial concept, birth of, 113                       Svennilson, Professor I., 36n
Railways, economic dictation of, 29,                Sweden, 32, 43-4
  44, 56                                            Switzerland, go
                                              167
                                            Index
                  At                            Utilitarianism,   135,     136,   138,   159;
                                                    see also Bentham, etc.
Taxation, progressive, as equaliser,
  46; international, 65
Theory as hypothesis,      161, 163;                                  Vv
  traditionalism of, 129-34, see also
   Inherited predilections and, 135             Valuations and moral beliefs, 160-3
  seqq.                                         “Vicious circle”, 11, 20, 21, 21n, 23
Thomas, W. I., 122n                             Viner, Professor Jacob, 29n, 150, 162,
Trade regulation in national planning,              153
  92-7
                                                                  WwW
                  U
                                                Walras, 140
Under-developed countries: bargain-             Welfare State, 39, 41, 46, 48-9; wel-
  ing powers    of, 69; economic         wea-      fare criterion, 146; welfare as sum
  pons of, 71 seqq.; foreign installa-             of individual interests, 138, 139
  tions in, after nationalisation, 72;          Wicksell, Knut, 21, 22, 37, 37, I10,
  nuisance tactics possible to, 74;                 130Nn, 143, 156
  population rates in, 84-5, 147;               Wieser’s    (von Wieser’s)    “perfect
  private enterprise in, 79-80; privi-             Communism’’, gon
  leged groups in, 59; social security          Williams, Professor J. W., 152n, 153n
  in, 82; State overall planning in,            Winslow, C. E. A., 11n; on “‘Vicious
  79-97; suffrage in, 83                           Circle”, 11, 11n
Universal suffrage in under-developed           World State, absence of, 63-5
  countries, 83
U.S.A.,   12,   31,    35,   70,   77,    905
  “American Creed” of, 18; negro                                      Z
  problem in, 13-21, 36-7; “‘stagnat-
  ing”’ areas of, 32-3                          Zola, and other “‘social’’ novelists, 43
       Methuen’s University Paperbacks
UP I    Archaeology and Society
        GRAHAME CLARK
        ‘A book which can transform an intelligent interest in
        archaeology into an informed one.’      Oxford Times


UP 2    Form and Meaning in Drama
        H. D. F. KITTO
        ‘A critical work of astonishing breadth and brilliance.’
                                  Times Educational Supplement

        Greek Political Theory: Plato and his Predeces-
        sors
        ERNEST BARKER
        Sir Ernest Barker presents Plato as a revolutionary of
        the pure Idea of the Good and an authoritarian of the
        pure reason.

        A History     of Political    Thought     in the 16th
        Century
        J. W. ALLEN
        A presentation of the main phases and features of
        political thought in the sixteenth century, based on an
        exhaustive study of contemporary writings in Latin,
        English, French, German and Italian.


        Introduction to the French Poets
        GEOFFREY BRERETON
        ‘Any reader who, like myself, enjoys French poetry
        without being an expert on it will be enlightened and
        stimulated . . . I firmly recommend this book.’
                           Raymond Mortimer, Sunday Times
         Introduction to Social Psychology
         WILLIAM MCDOUGALL
         On its first publication this pioneer book received
         immediate acclaim and has probably done more than
         any other single publication to stimulate study of the
         foundations of social behaviour.

         Landmarks in Russian Literature
         MAURICE BARING
         Maurice Baring did more than any other critic of his
         time to spread the appreciation of Russian letters
         among English-speaking people.

         Mysticism
         EVELYN UNDERHILL
         Since its first publication Evelyn Underhill’s classic
         has been continuously read and studied. It has never
         been superseded.


         Plato: The Man and his Work
         A. E. TAYLOR
         “This is, I think, a great book, an honour to Oxford,
         to the Scottish universities, and to British scholarship.’
                                             Dean Inge, Theology

         Relativity
         ALBERT EINSTEIN
         This book remains the most popular and up-to-date
         exposition of the ideas of the founder of modern
         physics.

OPS ti   The Sacred Wood
         TAS ee LO
         This was the first volume of Mr Eliot’s criticism to be
         published. The essays in it are the product of his early
        writing days, and are especially interesting as evidence
        of his ideas on literature at that time.


        The Wheel of Fire
        G. WILSON KNIGHT
        ‘Professor G. Wilson Knight stands in a class by him-
        self among contemporary English critics.’
                                    Professor V. de S. Pinto


UP 13   William the Silent
        Cc. V. WEDGWOOD
        “This is a very good book, a reliable and well-balanced
        history of great events.’
                              G. M, Trevelyan, Sunday Times


UP 14   The Wealth of Nations
 & 15   ADAM SMITH
        Edited in two volumes by EDWIN CANNAN
        Edwin Cannan’s edition is recognized everywhere as
        the principal edition of Adam Smith’s great work,
        which Edmund Burke described as ‘in its ultimate
        result, probably the most important book that has
        ever been written’.


UP 16   Modern Elementary Logic
        L. SUSAN STEBBING
        A straightforward textbook for philosophy students in
        their first year.


UP 17 A Survey of Russian History
        B. H. SUMNER
        ‘This is a scholarly and admirably conceived historical
        work.’                                         Listener
UP 18   The Last Romantics
        GRAHAM HOUGH
        ‘A thoughtful critic with no axe to grind, exceptional
        also in his freedom from vulgarity, obscurity and
        pretentiousness.” Raymond Mortimer, Sunday Times


UP 19   Western Political Thought
        JOHN BOWLE
        ‘No one, I think, who is interested in the unending
        adventure of the human mind could fail to be inter-
        ested by these really illuminating pages.’
                            Harold Laski in a B.B.C. review


UP 20   Introduction to Astronomy
        C. PAYNE-GAPOSCHKIN
        ‘The most complete, balanced and readable elemen-
        tary account of the universe that the reviewer knows.’
                                    Times Literary Supplement


UP 21   An Economic History of the British Isles
        ARTHUR BIRNIE
        A full account of the economic development of Great
        Britain from the earliest times to the present day.


UP 22   The Common People
        G. D. H.   COLE and RAYMOND      POSTGATE
        ‘This is a masterly book. It is far and away the best
        available book on its subject.’        New Statesman


UP 23   A History of Ireland
        EDMUND CURTIS
        Within a short time of publication Professor Curtis’s
        book was accepted as the best single-volume history
        of Ireland.
UP 24   An Introduction to Ethics
        WILLIAM LILLIE
        ‘Mr Lillie must be congratulated . . . I shall unhesi-
        tatingly recommend his book to first-year students.’
                                              Adult Education


UP 25   Elements of Metaphysics
        A. E. TAYLOR
        Professor Taylor’s work has held its own for fifty
        years as the best comprehensive account of the main
        principles of metaphysics.



UP 26   Mathematics of Engineering Systems
        DEREK F. LAWDEN
        ‘It is undoubtedly a valuable addition to the literature
        of engineering mathematics and should prove helpful
        not only to students, but also to practising engineers
        and physicists.’            Journal of Applied Physics



UP 27   Life and        Thought   in the Greek     and Roman
        World
        M. CARY and T. J. HAARHOFF
        The aim of this book is to provide a brief but com-
        prehensive outline sketch of Greek and Roman
        civilization.



UP 28   The Growth of the English Novel
        RICHARD CHURCH
        This study, by an author who is himself a novelist
        as well as a poet and critic, presents a continuous story
        of the progress of the English novel.
UP 29     Elizabethan Life in Town and Country
          M. ST. CLARE BYRNE
          A vivid reconstruction of life and thought in Eliza-
          bethan times.


UP 30     The Congress of Vienna
          HAROLD NICOLSON
          ‘Mr. Nicolson has written a vivid, entertaining and
          penetrating book about an episode in nineteenth-
          century history with which his gifts and his own
          education most particularly qualified him to deal.’
                          Desmond MacCarthy, Sunday Times


UP 31     English Wayfaring Life in the Middle Ages
          J. J. JUSSERAND
          M. Jusserand brings sympathetic scholarship and
          warm enthusiasm to this study of travel in fourteenth-
          century England.


UP 32     Comparative Religion
          E. O. JAMES
          A comparative study of the history of religions
          intended primarily as a textbook for students, with
          references and a full bibliography of relevant liter-
          ature,


UP   33   The Architecture of Humanism
          GEOFFREY SCOTT
          ‘The most important contribution to the literature of
          aesthetics since the writings of Ruskin.’   The Times


UP 34     A Direct Entry to Organic Chemistry
          JOHN READ
          In 1949 this book was awarded the Cortina Prize
          of one million lire for the best popular scientific book
          published in the previous five years.


UP 35     Byzantine Civilization
          STEVEN RUNCIMAN
          Sir Steven Runciman gives a general picture of the
          Orientalized Graeco-Roman civilization which repre-
          sented the last phase of the Roman Empire and had
          its capital at Constantinople.


UP 36     The Wound and the Bow
          EDMUND WILSON
          A wide and penetrating study of artistic creation,
          this book contains detailed studies of Dickens and
          Kipling, and shorter pieces on Casanova, Edith
          Wharton, Ernest Hemingway and James Joyce.


UP   37   The Course of German History
          A. J. P. TAYLOR
          ‘He is not only a brilliant but a profound historian.’
                             R. H. S. Crossman, New Statesman


UP 38     King Solomon’s Ring
          KONRAD LORENZ
          ‘A book opening a whole series of doors upon enthral-
          ling and enchanting aspects of the animal world...
          decorated with sketches as charming, as com-
          passionate, as sensitive and humorous as his prose.’
                                                Daily Telegraph


UP 39     A History of England
          E. L. WOODWARD
          ‘A brilliant little book: it combines a concise record
          of events with an absorbing picture of England’s
        evolution in the political, social, economic and cultural
        spheres.’                                   Sunday Times


UP 40   Cromwell’s Army
        CHARLES FIRTH
        Sir Charles Firth’s classic work is now made available
        again after many years.


UP 4I   The Theory of Beauty
        E. F. CARRITT
        Mr. Carritt’s examination of the various aesthetic
        theories has been the standard book in English on
        the subject for two generations.


        The Instruments of Music
        ROBERT DONINGTON
        A full account of the mechanics and physics of hearing
        and of the history of musical instruments.


UP 43   Shakespeare’s Tragic Heroes
        LILY B. CAMPBELL
        A unique account of the connection between Shake-
        speare’s conception of passion and tragedy and his
        familiarity with the learning and philosophy of his
        day.


        Introduction to Money
        HONOR CROOME
        ‘Mrs Croome has written an attractive book dealing
        principally with the nature and development of
        money, but ranging also over a wide field of national
        and international economic activity.’
                                              Economic Journal
UP 45   The Physics of Music
        ALEXANDER WOOD
        A readable and comprehensive account of that inter-
        esting borderline territory which lies between physics
        and music,



        A History of Russia
        BERNARD PARES
        A standard work of the first importance for the student,
        and for all who appreciate the significance of Russia
        in the post-war world.



UP 47   Chaucer and his England
        G. G. COULTON
        A picture of Chaucer, the man, in the background of
        his period is provided by Dr Coulton’s classic hand-
        book to Chaucer’s poems.



UP 48   Chinese Thought from Confucius to Mao Tse-
        Tung
        H. G. CREEL
        ‘I can confidently recommend this book to anyone
        who wants to make a first acquaintance with systems
        of thought as important as those in our classical
        heritage.’            Maurice Collis, Time and Tide



UP 49   The Greek View of Life
        G. LOWES DICKINSON
        A sympathetic guide to Greek life and thought,
        divided into four main sections—Religion, the State,
        the Individual, and Art. There is a foreword by E. M.
        Forster.
UP 50   The Great Mathematicians
        H. W. TURNBULL
        A biographical history of mathematics from Thales and
        Pythagoras in the sixth century B.c. to the great
        mathematical pioneers of our own century.


UP 51   The Fifth French Republic
        DOROTHY PICKLES
        A full and cogent description of the Constitution of
        the Fifth Republic and its working, together with an
        analysis of the nature of the Republican tradition in
        France.


UP §2   An Economic History of Europe
        ARTHUR BIRNIE
        The revolutionary changes that transformed industry,
        commerce and agriculture at the beginning of the
        last century are combined in this book with an
        account of the reactions in the political and economic
        conditions of the chief European nations.


UP 53   Ideas in Conflict
         E. M. BURN
        The theories underlying the great intellectual and
        political movements of the contemporary world are
        examined in this book, and placed in historical pers-
        pective.


UP 54   English Literature and Society in the 18th
        Century
         LESLIE STEPHEN
        ‘A luminous survey of a favourite study showing
        undiminished vivacity and power of pointed expres-
        sion.’                                   The Times
UP   55   The Communist Party of the Soviet Union
           LEONARD SCHAPIRO
          An historical and analytical study of its subject, and
          the only fully documented account of its kind in any
          language.

UP 56     From the Gracchi to Nero
          H. H. SCULLARD
          An up-to-date account of the central period of the
          history of ancient Rome, covering the decline and fall
          of the Republic and the establishment of the pax
          Romana under the early Principate.

          The Art of Teaching
          GILBERT HIGHET
          ‘Something that is only too rare, a really first-class
          book on education.’          Lord James, The Guardian

          Habitat, Economy and Society
          C. DARYLL     FORDE
          An introduction to the ethnography and human
          geography of non-European peoples at diverse levels
          of cultural achievement and in different regions of the
          world.

          Psychology
          R. S. WOODWORTH and D. G. MARQUIS
          One of the most successful general textbooks of
          psychology ever published, this book has been through
          at least twenty-four printings.

UP 60     Keats’ Craftsmanship
          M. R. RIDLEY
          A study of Keats’ development as thinker and as
          literary craftsman. The author allows Keats as far as
          possible to speak for himself, using his letters to illus-
          trate the evolution of his thought and examining the
          early drafts of his poems to show his creative methods.
UP 61   A Short History of the Middle East
        G. KIRK
        ‘This . . . has become perhaps the most useful short
        guide to the tangled affairs of the Middle East during
        the last forty years or so.’
                                   Royal Asian Society Fournal
UP 62   Political Theory
        G. C. FIELD
        After sketching the historical development of political
        ideas Professor Field analyses and discusses some basic
        concepts of modern political theory, in particular the
        notions of the State, of Sovereignty and the Law.
UP63 Medieval People
        EILEEN POWER
        Many writers have recounted the lives of the heroes of
        the Middle Ages. This book is about ordinary folk who
        are so often left out of history. In it are described the
        lives of some typical people ranging from Bodo, a
        Frankish peasant, to a housewife of fourteenth-century
        Paris.
UP64 Outlines of Tudor and Stuart Plays: 1497-1642
     KARL J. HOLZKNECHT
        A student of Elizabethan and Jacobean drama will find
        this book a help to his studies. It provides synopses of
        eighty plays of the main dramatists, excluding Shake-
        speare. It will serve as a handy guide to readers who
        have difficulty in following the tangled plots and who
        wish to refresh their memories about plays they have
        read or seen on the stage.
UP 65   Aristotle
        SIR DAVID ROSS
        Sir David Ross gives here a straightforward account of
        Aristotle’s philosophy as it stands before us in his
        works, Attention has been paid both to Aristotle’s
        general principles and to the working out of these into
        a connected and detailed system.
 UP 66    Economic Theory and Under-Developed Regions
          GUNNAR MYRDAL
          ‘Around the central argument there cluster loosely a
          number of disquisitions on value judgements in
          economics,    on colonialism,      the criteria of national
          planning, and on international trade. All are stimulat-
          ing, all are valuable . . . a good book.’
                                                    The Economist

          The English Bible
          F. F. BRUCE
          Professor Bruce, in this comprehensive study of the
          various translations of the Bible into the English
          language, traces the story from its earliest days up to
          1961, the year of publication of the new English Bible.
          This history of the translation brings together facts and
          information which have previously appeared only in
          specialized accounts of the separate translations.


          Art and Artifice in Shakespeare
          ERIC STOLL
          This examination of the structural design of four plays
          - Othello, Macbeth, Hamlet, and King Lear - shows
          how Shakespeare obtained his effects by the repeated
          use of certain artistic devices.


~ UP 69   A Handbook of Greek Literature
          H. J ROSE
          This famous account of Greek literature is a con-
          tinuous narrative, complete in itself and assuming
          no previous acquaintance with Greek writings. It
          includes every author, from Homer to Lucian, who
          was Greek in both language and spirit.
up 70   A Handbook of Greek Mythology
        H. J. ROSE
        This book presents an outline of the subject, simply
        and directly told. The extension of Greek my-
        thology into Italy is also discussed, thus giving the
        book a value for students of Latin and English and
        indeed of all European literature.


UP 71 The Fascination of Numbers
        W. J. REICHMANN
        The greater part of this work is concerned with the
        fundamental aspects of number theory. It sets out
        to show the ways in which numbers or groups of
        numbers are related to each other; how they may be
        expressed in terms of each other; and the general
        nature of number behaviour in varying circum-
        stances.

uP 72   Introduction to Logical Theory
        P.   F.   STRAWSON

        This book has two complementary aims. It seeks to
        explain the nature of the exact discipline known as
        Formal Logic, and also to reveal something of the
        intricate logical structure of ordinary unformalized
        discourse.
           ‘This is a very impressive book, which will be
        read with profit by advanced students as well as by
        beginners.’
                                             Oxford Magazine

uP 73   A History of France
        ANDRE      MAUROIS
        ‘It is in the spirit of telling a dramatic story, rather
        than of cautious scientific analysis, that M. Maurois
        has tackled his fascinating task; and the result is, as
           it has already been hailed in France, the best
           modern one-volume history of France.’
                                              The Spectator

uP 74      The Industrial Revolution in the Eighteenth
           Century
           PAUL MANTOUX
           Professor T. S. Ashton, who supervised this new
           edition of the work, says in his preface ‘in both its
           architecture and detail this volume is by far the
           best introduction to the subject in any language...
           one of a few works on economic history that can
           justly be spoken of as classics’,

UP 75      Maps and Diagrams
           F. J. MONKHOUSE AND H. R. WILKINSON
           A reference book which is intended to help in the
           compilation and construction of a wide range of
           geographical maps and diagrams.

UP 76      Thackeray the Novelist
           GEOFFREY TILLOTSON
           An investigation of Thackeray’s novels carried out
           with the object of discovering how he wrote them
           and what they tell us of his thoughts and attitudes.

UPS   7,   The Medieval Centuries
           DENYS   HAY
           The changes which took place in Europe during the
           thousand years lying between the fifth and fifteenth
           centuries are the subject of this book.

UP 78      The Psychology of Society
           MORRIS GINSBERG
           In this book the author confines himself to a discussion
           of the fundamental problems of Social Psychology
           and offers a critical account as to the nature of the
           social mind.
                     Augsburg College
                   eorge Sverdrup Library
                        lis, Minnesota 55404

uP 79   The Law oh, Heol Institutions
        D. W. BOWETT
        This is an introductory text-book designed primarily
        for students and teachers of this subject, but it will
        also be of use to students of International Relations,
        persons actually involved in the work of international
        organizations and anyone interested in the institutional
        aspects of this field of activity.


UP 80   An Introduction to Cybernetics
        W. ROSS ASHBY
        Cybernetics has been defined as ‘the science of control
        and communication in the animal and the machine’ -
        in a word, as the art of steersmanship; and this book
        will appeal to all who would learn something of cyber-
        netics, communication theory and methods for regu-
        lation and control.


UP 81   Individuals
        P. F. STRAWSON
        The author describes this book as ‘an essay in de-
        scriptive metaphysics’. He repudiates what he calls
        ‘revisionary’ metaphysics, according to which reality
        is something more ultimate than that of the world of
        appearances, and concerns himself with the structure
        of what we believe about material bodies and persons.


uP 82   Political Parties
        MAURICE DUVERGER
        This is a comparative study of the systems of modern
        political parties. In studying the contémporary party
        systems, the author analyses in depth agd from a new
        point of view the evolution of politic&l institutions
        over the last hundred years.                 te
  COLONIAL
     “Out-of-Print”
OK SERVICE, INC.
23 EAST 4th STREET
EW YORK CITY 3, N. Y.
e Supply Out-of-Print Books
      OTHER   TITLES   IN THE   SERIES   INCLUDE:


UP6     Introduction to Social Psychology
        W. McDougall
UPIO  Relativity
      Albert Einstein
UP|I4 The Wealth of Nations (2 vols)
 & 15 Adam Smith, ed. Edwin Cannan
UPI9 Western Political Thought
     John Bowle
UP2! An Economic History of the British
     Isles
     Arthur Birnie
UP22 The Common People
     G. D. H. Cole and Raymond Postgate
UP37 The Course of German History
     A. J. P. Taylor
UP46 A History of Russia
     Bernard Pares
UP48 Chinese Thought from Confucius to
     Mao Tse-Tung
     H. G. Creel
UP5I The Fifth French Republic
     Dorothy Pickles
UP52 An Economic History of Europe
     Arthur Birnie
UP53 Ideas in Conflict
     E. M. Burns
UP55 The Communist Party of the Soviet
     Union
     Leonard Schapiro

A complete list will be found inside




UNIVERSITY      PAPERBACKS        ARE    PUBLISHED   8Y


METHUEN                     & COLTD
Il NEW    FETTER   LANE    LONDON        EC4



                                    Cover design by Pat Keel,
                                                                0UA
                                                                AVN
