[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: journal/A08-zhen-shi-lu-2023-the-impact-of-regional-integration-strategies-on-the-formation-of-city-regions-and-its-agglomeration-shadow-evidence-from-the-yangtze-river-delta-china-10.3390-land12051053.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Title:           The Impact of Regional Integration Strategies on the Formation of City Regions and Its Agglomeration Shadow: Evidence from the Yangtze River Delta, China
Subject:         Using a sample of 122 county-level units in the Yangtze River Delta (YRD) region from 2000 to 2017, this study employs a difference-in-differences model (DID) to examine the impact of regional integration strategy (RIS) on city-region formation and a difference-in-difference-in-difference model (DDD) to test whether it has spatial heterogeneity. The results indicate that RIS has a significant positive impact on industrial integration while it also displays obvious industrial heterogeneity and spatial heterogeneity. The results of the present study contribute to the following points: First, the implementation of RIS promotes a balanced layout of the secondary industry in the region, yet the tertiary industry tends to agglomerate towards central cities. Furthermore, we found that RIS has a more significant negative effect on the integration of the secondary industry and tertiary industry in cities adjacent to metropolis. Consequently, RIS magnifies the “agglomeration shadow” within city regions in terms of industrial integration. Last, our in-depth fieldwork on Jiaxing unravels the mechanism of the shadow effect of RIS.
Keywords:        city region; regional integration strategy; industrial integration; DDD model; Yangtze River Delta
Author:          Yanlin Zhen, Dehao Shi and Yanan Lu
Creator:         LaTeX with hyperref
Producer:        pdfTeX-1.40.21
CreationDate:    Fri May 12 09:56:57 2023 WIB
ModDate:         Fri May 12 10:57:01 2023 WIB
Custom Metadata: no
Metadata Stream: no
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            none
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           16
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       595.276 x 841.89 pts (A4)
Page rot:        0
File size:       1007963 bytes
Optimized:       no
PDF version:     1.7
[Extracted Text]
             land
Article
The Impact of Regional Integration Strategies on the Formation
of City Regions and Its Agglomeration Shadow: Evidence from
the Yangtze River Delta, China
Yanlin Zhen 1 , Dehao Shi 2, * and Yanan Lu 3, *

                                          1   Spatial Planning Center, Yangtze Delta Region Institute of Tsinghua University, Jiaxing 314006, China;
                                              zhenyl03@163.com
                                          2   Department of Geography and Resource Management, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
                                              Hong Kong SAR 999077, China
                                          3   School of Public Affairs, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310030, China
                                          *   Correspondence: dehao.shi@link.cuhk.edu.hk (D.S.); luyanan@zju.edu.cn (Y.L.)


                                          Abstract: Using a sample of 122 county-level units in the Yangtze River Delta (YRD) region from 2000
                                          to 2017, this study employs a difference-in-differences model (DID) to examine the impact of regional
                                          integration strategy (RIS) on city-region formation and a difference-in-difference-in-difference model
                                          (DDD) to test whether it has spatial heterogeneity. The results indicate that RIS has a significant
                                          positive impact on industrial integration while it also displays obvious industrial heterogeneity and
                                          spatial heterogeneity. The results of the present study contribute to the following points: First, the
                                          implementation of RIS promotes a balanced layout of the secondary industry in the region, yet the
                                          tertiary industry tends to agglomerate towards central cities. Furthermore, we found that RIS has a
                                          more significant negative effect on the integration of the secondary industry and tertiary industry
                                          in cities adjacent to metropolis. Consequently, RIS magnifies the “agglomeration shadow” within
                                          city regions in terms of industrial integration. Last, our in-depth fieldwork on Jiaxing unravels the
                                          mechanism of the shadow effect of RIS.

Citation: Zhen, Y.; Shi, D.; Lu, Y. The   Keywords: city region; regional integration strategy; industrial integration; DDD model; Yangtze
Impact of Regional Integration            River Delta
Strategies on the Formation of City
Regions and Its Agglomeration
Shadow: Evidence from the Yangtze
River Delta, China. Land 2023, 12,        1. Introduction
1053. https://doi.org/10.3390/
                                                The literature on urban and regional development has extensively explored agglomera-
land12051053
                                          tion and its external economy [1], while city regions have become a prevalent topic since the
Academic Editor: Thomas                   rise of new regionalism at the turn of the century [2–4]. As a result, spatial reconstruction
Panagopoulos                              in city regions, which refers to the core city and its outer surrounding areas, has brought
Received: 2 April 2023
                                          socioeconomic transformations involving urban sprawl [5,6], industrial upgrading [7], and
Revised: 9 May 2023                       capital accumulation [8,9]. More importantly, framing urban issues on the regional scale
Accepted: 10 May 2023                     does a favor to clarify the inter-scalar and cross-boundary interactions among cities [10].
Published: 12 May 2023                    Such interactions create a dynamic, interdependent, and self-adaptive network for geo-
                                          graphically adjacent and economically connected cities. Examining city regions has led
                                          to a novel spatial epistemology, paving the way for new paradigms regarding population
                                          mobility, industrial restructuring, land use, and urban governance [9,11–16]. Subsequently,
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.         research on city regions has gone beyond classic theories such as growth poles and central
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.        places and has inspirited many enlightening theories and topics such as multidimensional
This article is an open access article    proximity, global city regions, borrowed size, and agglomeration shadow [17,18]. Recently,
distributed under the terms and           the growing spatial polarization and inequality within city regions have been increasingly
conditions of the Creative Commons
                                          recognized worldwide [19,20]. In Europe, for example, the discourse on city regions has
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
                                          been extended to highlight the achievements of major cities in terms of innovation, eco-
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
                                          nomic growth, dynamism, and global competitiveness, creating a generally unfavorable
4.0/).




Land 2023, 12, 1053. https://doi.org/10.3390/land12051053                                                          https://www.mdpi.com/journal/land
Land 2023, 12, 1053                                                                                            2 of 16




                      context for peripheral cities [19,21]. Therefore, formulating, evaluating, and reflecting on
                      specific RIS to promote just and balanced growth in all cities while also accounting for their
                      spatial heterogeneity has emerged as a new and growing area of interest in the field of
                      city-regional studies [22,23].
                            Previous studies have explored the distribution, evolution, and mechanism of urban-
                      based socioeconomic activities on regional scales during the formation of city regions [24].
                      Most of these studies were established on the basis of classical economic theories. According
                      to classical economic geography, the city region is attributed to differential land rent and
                      the transformation of core-peripheral structure [25]. Conversely, empirical studies based
                      on new economic geography focus more on imperfectly competitive markets, bounded
                      rationality, and increasing returns to scale in city-regional formation [25–27]. However,
                      most of the existing literature focused on market-led, spontaneous redistribution in city
                      regions but overlooked the role of state power. This study attempts to verify whether and
                      to what extent RIS promotes the formulation of city regions by exemplifying one of the
                      most developed city regions in China.
                            Additionally, existing research on city regions has mainly focused on the trans-
                      formation of economic externalities resulting from spatial networking. Compared to
                      the economic externalities of hierarchical urban systems stemming from physical geo-
                      graphic proximity, networked city regions have been observed across non-adjacent physical
                      spaces. Some scholars conceptualize these externalities as “externality fields” [1], “cluster
                      economies” [28], “complex economies” [29], or “urban network externalities” [30]. Al-
                      though most current research focuses on conceptualizing and measuring the economic
                      externalities in the process of city-regional formation [31,32], few studies paid attention
                      to whether there is spatial heterogeneity in the externalities of city regions and to what a
                      certain extent. In summary, seminal works have examined the various spatial patterns,
                      mechanisms, and heterogeneity of city regions in areas such as migration, industrial redis-
                      tribution, and urban governance, producing valuable insights and conclusions. However,
                      to date, there is no relevant literature that directly investigates the impact of state power on
                      the formation of city regions and their spatial heterogeneity.
                            Since its accession to the World Trade Organization in 2001, China has increasingly
                      become a magnet for multinational corporations and capital, thereby necessitating a re-
                      calibration of its regional strategy to better align with market-oriented accumulation and
                      governance [14,33]. Subsequently, the Chinese government gradually embraced the concept
                      of new regionalism and presented their interpretation of the city region, referred to as
                      the metropolitan area. These are regional entities with a high-level city at the core, such
                      as the Beijing metropolitan area, Shanghai metropolitan area, Guangdong metropolitan
                      area, and others. Following the 2008 financial crisis, Chinese cities faced evident surplus
                      capacity and regulatory crises. To address these challenges, China initiated adjustments to
                      the previous city-regional model that centered around a single city and shifted towards a
                      polycentric approach to city regions, namely urban agglomeration. In contrast to the city
                      regions driven by market forces under Western neoliberalism since the late 20th century,
                      China’s city regions exhibit a more pronounced state intervention [33,34]. To be specific, to
                      accelerate the cultivation of city regions, the Chinese governments formulated targeted re-
                      gional integration strategies (RIS), aiming to reduce institutional barriers and accelerate the
                      cross-border flow of resources, thereby enhancing the economic interaction and industrial
                      division of labor among cities within specific regions.
                            Thereupon, we deduce that the mushrooming RIS in China and the rapidly urbanizing
                      hinterland within city-region formation provide a fertile ground for investigating this topic.
                      This raises several questions that stimulate our interest: (1) Does the state-guided strategy
                      of regional integration, which functions as an essential symbol of city-region formation,
                      advance the formation of city regions, and to what extent? (2) What kinds of heterogeneity
                      are existed in such state-orchestrating city regions, particularly in terms of industrial and
                      spatial structure?
Land 2023, 12, 1053                                                                                              3 of 16




                           This study focuses on the Yangtze River Delta, one of the most advanced and net-
                      worked city regions in China, including all county-level units in Shanghai Municipality,
                      Zhejiang Province, and Jiangsu Province. The “Yangtze River Delta Regional Plan” (YR-
                      DRP), approved by the Chinese central government in 2010, was regarded as a quasi-natural
                      experiment in this study. Based on panel data on secondary and tertiary sectors of 121 ur-
                      ban entities in the YRD from 2000 to 2017, we use a difference-in-differences model (DID)
                      to empirically estimate the net effect of RIS on the city region construction. Additionally,
                      a difference-in-difference-in-difference model (DDD) was employed to further identify
                      whether the formation of city regions has potential spatial heterogeneity in inter-city inter-
                      actions (i.e., agglomeration shadow).

                      2. Literature Review and Research Hypotheses
                      2.1. City-Regional Integration and Regional Integration Strategy
                            The emergence of city regions, spanning from megalopolis to urban agglomeration,
                      has attracted wide attention from scholars of geography, economy, and political studies.
                      The formation of city regions entails multiple regional integrations involving economic,
                      industrial, institutional, and cultural integration, which are regarded as essential agendas.
                      Currently, explanations of the spatial dynamics of city-regional integration mainly focus
                      on two aspects. Some literature pays attention to the socioeconomic effect of city regions,
                      suggesting that the mechanism of RIS promoting city-regional formation lies in encouraging
                      and accelerating cross-border and cross-boundary flowing of labor, capital, and other
                      factors [10,14]. Another line of research places more emphasis on the state agenda and
                      highlights that the formation of city regions is a response to tensions surrounding social
                      reproduction and sustainability within the city region. It is guided by the government’s
                      adoption of the new regionalism approach [33,35]. The transformation of state power in
                      terms of reterritorialization and rescaling in capital accumulation provides an insightful
                      understanding of the spatial reorganization of city-regional integration [36]. The former
                      approach emphasizes the quantitative analysis of inter-city interactions in the formation of
                      city regions, while the latter focuses on elucidating the policy utility of this process.
                            Despite growing calls for city-region integration to be examined through the lens of
                      multi-agent intermeshing negotiation [11,37] or internalization of externalities brought
                      about by cross-border mobility [38], there is a lack of research that integrates both per-
                      spectives. It is unclear whether there is a causal relationship between the implementation
                      of RIS, which represents state intervention, and the movement of socioeconomic activi-
                      ties, which represents inter-city interactions. Yet, no consensus has been reached on this
                      issue. Therefore, this study will focus on whether RIS significantly affects the relocation of
                      socioeconomic activities within city regions.
                            Generally, city regions consist of central cities that are dominated by tertiary industries,
                      such as producer services and finance, and peripheral regions that are dominated by
                      secondary industries, such as manufacturing and processing industries. The YRDRP
                      in 2010 emphasized economic integration through industries relocation as the primary
                      goal. Specifically, the strategy explicitly stated that the modern service industry needs
                      to concentrate in central metropolises such as Shanghai, Nanjing, and Hangzhou, while
                      the manufacturing industry is envisioned to relocate to other cities within the region to
                      achieve a more balanced spatial distribution. The decentralization of secondary industries
                      and the agglomeration of tertiary industries represent the formation of city regions, as
                      well as industrial integration [39,40]. Thus, this paper proposes the first hypothesis that
                      the implementation of regional integration strategies (RIS) will significantly promote
                      industrial integration in the process of city-region formation. Additionally, we argue
                      that the manufacturing and service industries, which, respectively, dominate the second
                      and third sectors, will display distinct spatial patterns because of RIS implementation.
                The formation of city regions marks a transition of the regional organization from a
       hierarchical to a networked structure, signifying a fundamental shift in the paradigm of
       intercity interactions. Alonso (1973) introduced the concept of “borrowed size” and
       demonstrated
Land 2023, 12, 1053       that small cities could benefit from agglomeration economies “borrowed” 4 of 16
       from larger neighboring cities. Scholars, including Burger, Meijers, Hoogerbrugge and
       Tresserra [18], Meijers and Burger [41], and Volgmann and Rusche [42], have advanced
       the measurement of2.2. Spatial
                                  borrowed size            and within
                                               Heterogeneity      employed
                                                                         City it      in the process of paradigm shifting
                                                                                Regions
       from a hierarchical urban      Thesystem
                                             formation  to of city
                                                             networked
                                                                    regionscity      region.
                                                                                marks a           To beof the
                                                                                            transition      specific,
                                                                                                                   regionalin the    context from
                                                                                                                                organization
                                a hierarchical      to a  networked      structure,    signifying
       of the hierarchical urban system, agglomeration externalities in specific cities are typically  a fundamental        shift  in the paradigm
                                of intercity interactions. Alonso (1973) introduced the concept of “borrowed size” and
       rooted in the size of the city, with advanced urban functions, industrial structure, and
                                demonstrated that small cities could benefit from agglomeration economies “borrowed”
       modernity often being    frompositively         correlated
                                        larger neighboring              with
                                                                  cities.       largerincluding
                                                                           Scholars,       city sizes.     Nonetheless,
                                                                                                        Burger,                   as city re- and
                                                                                                                  Meijers, Hoogerbrugge
       gions are constructed        based[18],
                                Tresserra     on Meijers
                                                   networked         spatial
                                                              and Burger         interactions,
                                                                             [41], and    Volgmann    the   aforementioned
                                                                                                         and Rusche      [42], have causa-
                                                                                                                                       advanced the
                                measurement        of  borrowed     size  and    employed
       tion has been gradually decoupled [43]. Small and medium-sized cities located within    it in  the  process   of  paradigm      shifting
                                                                                                                                           city from
       regions are capable aofhierarchical
                                     hosting urban urban system to networked city region. To be specific, in the context of the
                                                             functions that may surpass the population size, ow-
                                hierarchical urban system, agglomeration externalities in specific cities are typically rooted
       ing to drawing upon      in the   population
                                   the size    of the city,necessary
                                                              with advanced to support         these functions
                                                                                  urban functions,                      from theand
                                                                                                         industrial structure,         wider
                                                                                                                                           modernity
       urban network [44].often   Such      spatial
                                        being           effects,
                                                 positively         termed
                                                               correlated         “borrowed
                                                                             with larger             size”, have
                                                                                              city sizes.               emerged
                                                                                                             Nonetheless,       as cityas    an are
                                                                                                                                          regions
       effective strategy for      peripheral
                                constructed          cities
                                                 based    on to    achievespatial
                                                              networked         greater      economic
                                                                                        interactions,     thedevelopment
                                                                                                               aforementionedand            as- has
                                                                                                                                      causation
       cend to higher levelsbeen       gradually
                                  within             decoupled
                                              the context       of [43].
                                                                    urban Small    and medium-sized
                                                                              region      construction.      cities
                                                                                                                Onlocated       within city
                                                                                                                      the contrary,         theregions
                                are capable of hosting urban functions that may surpass the population size, owing to
       concept of “agglomeration             shadow” was conceptualized from the opposite spatial effect
                                drawing upon the population necessary to support these functions from the wider urban
       of “borrowed size”, network
                                 referring      toSuch
                                             [44].  the possibility
                                                           spatial effects,that    residents
                                                                              termed     “borrowedof peripheral
                                                                                                         size”, have cities
                                                                                                                        emerged   workas anand
                                                                                                                                             effective
       consume in core cities.         Small
                                strategy    for and       medium-sized
                                                peripheral cities    to achievecities
                                                                                    greaterlocated
                                                                                             economic    at the   periphery
                                                                                                           development        and of     large
                                                                                                                                    ascend   to higher
                                levels withinreduced
       urban centers may experience                the context or of
                                                                   evenurban   region construction.
                                                                           counteractive           effectsOn      the contrary,
                                                                                                              resulting       fromthe      concept of
                                                                                                                                      spatial
                               “agglomeration shadow” was conceptualized from the opposite spatial effect of “borrowed
       networking.
                                size”, referring to the possibility that residents of peripheral cities work and consume in
                In recent years,core
                                 thecities.
                                       city-regional
                                               Small andcharacteristics
                                                              medium-sized cities    have    gradually
                                                                                         located              emergedofin
                                                                                                     at the periphery             theurban
                                                                                                                               large   Yang-   centers
       tze River Delta, as well may as      the reduced
                                      experience  agglomeration  or evenshadow          effect.
                                                                            counteractive           For resulting
                                                                                                effects   example,   from Jiaxing,
                                                                                                                              spatial which
                                                                                                                                       networking.
       is one of the prefecture-level In recent cities    adjacent
                                                   years, the           to Shanghai,
                                                                city-regional                 has have
                                                                                 characteristics     experienced          significant
                                                                                                            gradually emerged         in he ag-
                                                                                                                                              Yangtze
       glomeration shadows in many aspects, including population immigration, industrial up-is one
                                River   Delta,   as  well  as the  agglomeration      shadow       effect. For  example,      Jiaxing,  which
                                of the prefecture-level cities adjacent to Shanghai, has experienced significant agglomera-
       grading, and more. tion   Some      studies based on the new regionalism perspective suggest that
                                      shadows in many aspects, including population immigration, industrial upgrading,
       local governments and    shouldmore.  propose
                                                Some studiesmorebased
                                                                    powerful         integration
                                                                            on the new        regionalismpolicies     to eliminate
                                                                                                               perspective       suggest thethat local
       shadow effects. However, governmentsfew should
                                                  studiespropose
                                                               have more
                                                                       investigated
                                                                                powerfulwhether
                                                                                             integration  and    to what
                                                                                                             policies          extent the
                                                                                                                        to eliminate      suchshadow
                                effects.  However,       few  studies   have   investigated
       shadow effects are rooted in RIS. Subsequently, this paper proposes a second research     whether     and  to  what     extent  such   shadow
                                effects are rooted in RIS. Subsequently, this paper proposes a second research hypothesis
       hypothesis that regional          integration strategies will intensify spatial heterogeneity in the
                                that regional integration strategies will intensify spatial heterogeneity in the process of
       process of city-regional        formation.
                                city-regional     formation.
                On the basis of the        theoretical
                                      On the    basis of the  discussion
                                                                theoretical and
                                                                              discussionresearch        hypotheses,
                                                                                             and research      hypotheses,   thetheresearch
                                                                                                                                     research frame-
                                work    in this  paper
       framework in this paper is shown in the Figure 1.  is shown    in the  Figure    1.




       Figure 1. Theoretical Figure
                             mechanism
                                    1.    of RIS and
                                       Theoretical     research
                                                   mechanism      framework.
                                                             of RIS and research framework.


       3. Methodology and Data Collection
       3.1. Study Area
           According to the YRDRP published in 2010, the initial integration strategy of the
       Yangtze River Delta primarily focused on Shanghai, Jiangsu Province, and Zhejiang
         Land 2023, 12, 1053                                                                                                                              5 of 16




                                              3. Methodology and Data Collection
d 2023, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW                 3.1. Study Area                                                                              5 of 16

                                                   According to the YRDRP published in 2010, the initial integration strategy of the
                                             Yangtze River Delta primarily focused on Shanghai, Jiangsu Province, and Zhejiang
                                Province. TheProvince.
                                                 plan      The
                                                       identifiedplan    identified
                                                                     16 cities as the16core
                                                                                          cities  as the
                                                                                              area,  which core   area, the
                                                                                                              included    which included
                                                                                                                                 province-level   the province-
                                municipality of Shanghai, 8 out of the 13 prefecture-level cities in Jiangsu Province Province
                                             level municipality       of  Shanghai,   8 out   of the  13  prefecture-level       cities in  Jiangsu
                                             (namelySuzhou,
                                (namely Nanjing,        Nanjing,Wuxi,
                                                                   Suzhou, Wuxi,
                                                                           Changzhou, Changzhou,
                                                                                           Zhenjiang, Zhenjiang,
                                                                                                          Yangzhou,  Yangzhou,       Taizhou,
                                                                                                                          Taizhou, and       Nan-and Nantong),
                                tong), and 7andout7of
                                                    outtheof11
                                                             the 11  prefecture-level
                                                               prefecture-level     citiescities
                                                                                            in in   Zhejiang
                                                                                               Zhejiang         Province
                                                                                                            Province         (namely
                                                                                                                        (namely          Hangzhou, Ningbo,
                                                                                                                                     Hangzhou,
                                             Huzhou,
                                Ningbo, Huzhou,          Jiaxing,
                                                     Jiaxing,       Shaoxing,
                                                               Shaoxing,         Zhoushan,
                                                                             Zhoushan,     and and    Taizhou).
                                                                                                 Taizhou).    In In     addition,
                                                                                                                 addition,     the the     above-mentioned
                                                                                                                                    above-men-
                                tioned 15 15    prefecture-level
                                            prefecture-level    citiescities
                                                                         andand
                                                                              thethe   Shanghai
                                                                                   Shanghai         municipality
                                                                                                 municipality        serve
                                                                                                                  serve    as as
                                                                                                                               thethe  core
                                                                                                                                     core     implementation
                                                                                                                                           imple-
                                             areas  of  RIS,  while   county-level    units   within   these   areas
                                mentation areas of RIS, while county-level units within these areas are labeled as the are  labeled    as  the   Treated group
                                Treated group of RIS, and county-level units of other cities are noted as the Control group.It should be
                                             of RIS,  and   county-level     units  of other   cities  are  noted   as  the  Control    group.
                                It should beunderlined
                                              underlinedthat thatthe
                                                                   thefocus
                                                                        focusofofthe
                                                                                  thecity-regional
                                                                                       city-regional study
                                                                                                         study is
                                                                                                                is the
                                                                                                                   the interaction
                                                                                                                         interaction of     urban entities, so
                                                                                                                                        of urban
                                entities, so municipal districts within a specific prefecture-level city are regarded as asingle
                                             municipal     districts  within  a specific   prefecture-level     city are   regarded     as  a  sin- statistical
                                             unit.
                                gle statistical    AA
                                                unit. total  of of
                                                         total  121121urban
                                                                         urbanentity
                                                                                entityunits
                                                                                         unitswere  included
                                                                                                 were   included in in
                                                                                                                    this  study.
                                                                                                                       this   study.
                                     To verify the potential heterogeneity of the city region in the second the
                                                   To  verify  the  potential   heterogeneity      of the  city  region    in       second hypothesis,
                                                                                                                               hypothesis,      it is        it is
                                             necessary    to identify    research  objects   where   potential    shadow
                                necessary to identify research objects where potential shadow effects may occur. Based on     effects  may     occur.  Based   on
                                             existing   research    and   on-site investigations      in  the  Yangtze
                                existing research and on-site investigations in the Yangtze River Delta region, this studyRiver    Delta   region,    this study
                                designates designates
                                             county-levelcounty-level
                                                              units adjacent units
                                                                                to adjacent     to the areas
                                                                                    the municipal       municipal     areas ofNanjing,
                                                                                                               of Shanghai,        Shanghai,   andNanjing, and
                                Hangzhou as potential hadow areas, which are labeled as Shadow groups in the DDDin the DDD
                                             Hangzhou       as potential    shadow     areas,  which     are labeled    as  Shadow      groups
                                             model.
                                model. All other      All other county-level
                                                    county-level                   units are
                                                                     units are labeled          labeled as non-shadow
                                                                                           as non-shadow        groups. (See    groups
                                                                                                                                  Figure(See2) Figure 2).




                                Figure 2. The Yangtze River Delta, the treated group of RIS and potential shadow group.
                                            Figure 2. The Yangtze River Delta, the treated group of RIS and potential shadow group.

                                     Since the turn of the new millennium, China has increasingly welcomed multina-
                                tional corporations to establish production departments in domestic, especially after
                                China’s accession to the World Trade Organization in 2001. The entry of multinational
                                corporations and the expansion of the manufacturing industry have gradually accelerated
                                intercity interactions in the Yangtze River Delta region. Prior to the commencement of the
                                trade dispute between China and the United States in 2018, foreign investment continued
Land 2023, 12, 1053                                                                                              6 of 16




                           Since the turn of the new millennium, China has increasingly welcomed multinational
                      corporations to establish production departments in domestic, especially after China’s
                      accession to the World Trade Organization in 2001. The entry of multinational corporations
                      and the expansion of the manufacturing industry have gradually accelerated intercity
                      interactions in the Yangtze River Delta region. Prior to the commencement of the trade
                      dispute between China and the United States in 2018, foreign investment continued to flow
                      into the Yangtze River Delta area, facilitating the reallocation of industries. Consequently,
                      to encapsulate China’s duration of engagement with globalization, the research period of
                      the present study spans from 2000 to 2017.

                      3.2. Methodology
                            To validate the above two hypotheses, the empirical process of this study follows three
                      steps. First, we attempt to characterize the industrial integration of the Yangtze River Delta
                      region using the location quotient method. The measure of location entropy can provide a
                      more intuitive reflection of the spatial reallocation of specific industries, and it serves as
                      a parameter with concrete meaning for explaining the results of subsequent DID models.
                      Since the social and economic data used in this study are at the county level, which allows
                      for more precise identification of urban entities, industry data can only be classified into
                      the secondary and tertiary sectors rather than specific industrial categories, which is one of
                      the limitations of this study. Subsequently, as the implementation of RIS can be viewed as a
                      quasi-natural experiment that has been extensively scrutinized using the DID model, we
                      would utilize the DID model as the baseline regression method to assess the net impact of
                      RIS on industrial integration. Finally, the DDD model would be employed to verify the
                      RIS’s spatial heterogeneity on industrial integration. This step would determine whether
                      there is an “agglomeration shadow“ or “borrowed size” caused by RIS.

                      3.2.1. Location Quotient Model
                           This paper utilizes the location quotient method to calculate the degree of regional
                      industrial integration. If the location quotient of a certain industry in a specific region
                      increases, it suggests that the region has a higher specialization in that industry. The
                      location quotient model is constructed as follows:

                                                                     eir    ∑r eir
                                                            γit =         /                                         (1)
                                                                    ∑i eir ∑i ∑r eir

                      where variable γit denotes the index of industrial integration of industry r in city i. Variables
                      LQSI and LQTI refer to the result of location quotient analysis conducted on the secondary
                      and tertiary industry, respectively. LQSI and LQTI denote the ratio of industry proportion
                      in a given area to that in the entire region. A higher coefficient of this variable implies a
                      greater concentration of the industry within the city region, leading to both a comparative
                      and a relative scale advantage.

                      3.2.2. DID Model
                          This paper uses the RIS in the YRD implemented in 2010 as a quasi-natural experiment.
                      The DID model is constructed as follows:

                                      γit = β 0 + β 1 RISit + β 2 Treati + β 3 T t + τCovit + µi + δt + ε it        (2)

                      where variable γit denotes the index of industrial integration (the result of location quotient
                      analysis) for city i in year t. Referencing from the existing literature about the city-regional
                      industrial effect, we take the output changes of the secondary and tertiary industries as the
                      dependent variables. Treati is a dummy variable, referring to whether the city i belongs to
                      the sixteen-core prefecture-level cities of the YRD. If city i is part of core region, Treati = 1;
                      otherwise, Treati = 0. Similarly, Tt is a time dummy variable, showing that quasi-natural
                      experiment was implemented at year t. The YRDRP was promulgated in 2010; thus, Tt = 1
Land 2023, 12, 1053                                                                                              7 of 16




                      after 2010; otherwise, Tt = 0 before 2010. RISit is the most important variable representing
                      the RIS effect, which is equal to Treati × Tt . The estimated β 1 captures the effect of RIS
                      implemented in a city on industrial integration. If β 1 is significantly positive, it means that
                      the implementation of RIS improves the industrial specialization within the city region. On
                      the contrary, the significantly negative β 1 indicates a homogenization trend caused by RIS.
                           In addition, the parameters β 2 and β 3 represent the difference in the RIS effect between
                      the presence and absence and after and before, respectively. Covit reflects a set of control
                      variables, which is not fixed in this study due to the influence of different factors on the
                      industrial integration of secondary and tertiary industries. Variables β 0 and εit indicate
                      the constant and residual items, respectively. The variable µi is the city fixed effect used to
                      control urban heterogeneity, and δt is the time fixed effect used to control the time trend.

                      3.2.3. DDD Model
                           In order to estimate the heterogeneity of the effect across the industrial evolution of
                      RIS, this paper proposes the following DDD model by adding the variable Sha and its
                      interaction term with RISit , Treati and Tt into DID model:

                              γit = α0 + α1 RISit ×Shai + α2 Shai × Treati + α3 Shai × T t +α4 RISit + α4 Shai
                                                                                                                    (3)
                                               +α5 Treati + α6 T t + τCovit + µi + δt + ε it

                      where Shai denotes a dummy variable indicating whether city i is potentially affected by
                      the shadow effect. The estimated α1 captures the heterogeneity of the effect of RIS. If city
                      i is located in the vicinity of the metropolis areas (Shanghai, Hangzhou, and Nanjing) of
                      YRD, Shai = 1, whereas if not, Shai = 0. A significant positive value of α1 indicates that
                      the implementation of RIS brings a “borrowed size” effect to county-level units adjacent
                      to the municipal areas. Otherwise, a significantly negative value of α1 means that the
                      implementation of RIS brings an “agglomeration shadow” effect.

                      3.3. Data Source and Descriptive Statistics of Variables
                            The data sources used in this study include statistical yearbooks from Zhejiang
                      Province, Jiangsu Province, and Shanghai Municipality for information on the gross output
                      value of the secondary industry, the gross output value of the tertiary industry, and per
                      capita GDP. Meanwhile, data on fixed asset investment, real estate investment, public
                      fiscal expenditure, and patents granted for the invention are gleaned from the statistical
                      yearbooks of diverse prefecture-level cities and counties. Given the difference of the units
                      of measurement among the variables, the data for variables, including secondary indus-
                      try, tertiary industry, population number, gross domestic product per capita, fixed-asset
                      investment, real estate investment, public financial expenditure, granted patents, and in-
                      dustrial structure are processed into logarithmic form in the subsequent analysis. Due to
                      the constraints of county-level statistical data and the need for a sufficiently long panel
                      data period for the DID model, we are only able to describe the industrial structure using
                      basic output values of the secondary and tertiary industries rather than more detailed
                      industrial categories.
                            As aforementioned, the indication of regional integration and city-regional formation
                      in the industrial dimension are the tendencies for the tertiary industry to be concentrated
                      and specialized while the secondary sector to be balanced. Thus, both the location quotient
                      index of secondary industry decreasing and that of tertiary industry increasing indicated
                      a positive tendency of region integration. The descriptive statistical results of the above
                      variables are shown in the Appendix A. The LEST and LETI of cities range from 0.26 to
                      1.36 and 0.60 to 1.52, respectively, which indicated that the degree of agglomeration and
                      specialization of the secondary industry is lower than that of the tertiary industry.
Land 2023, 12, 1053                                                                                                                8 of 16




                      4. Regression Results
                      4.1. Benchmark Regression
                           First, we used the location quotient to measure the industrial integration change
                      of secondary and tertiary sectors in the YRD during the study period. Furthermore,
                      the promotion effect of RIS on the formation of city regions is estimated by benchmark
                      regression, as shown in Table 1. The corresponding columns (1) and (2) list the variables
                      and coefficients of the integration of secondary and tertiary industries. All parameters are
                      estimated using robust standard errors.

                      Table 1. Benchmark regression results.

                                                               (1)                                                       (2)
                              Variables                                                 Variables
                                                              LQSI                                                      LQTI
                                  RIS                      −0.016 ***                       RIS                         0.002 *
                                                             (−6.31)                                                    (0.71)
                                 GDP                       −0.072 ***                      POP                       −0.059 ***
                                                            (−14.38)                                                   (−8.63)
                                pGDP                        0.010 ***                     pGDP                        0.027 ***
                                                             (23.28)                                                    (5.02)
                                  PFE                       0.020 ***                       PFE                       0.009 ***
                                                              (4.23)                                                    (1.41)
                                  FAI                        0.004 **                       PAT                       −0.005 *
                                                              (2.43)                                                    (−3.5)
                                  RSI                       0.003 ***                       RSI                       0.387 ***
                                                              (2.99)                                                   (82.29)
                                 INDS                      −0.446 ***                      INDS                       0.001 ***
                                                           (−112.82)                                                    (0.32)
                                 _cons                        0.060 *                      _cons                     1.00585 ***
                                                              (1.81)                                                   (17.23)
                                City FE                         Yes                       City FE                         Yes
                                Year FE                         Yes                       Year FE                         Yes
                                   N                           2178                          N                           2178
                               R_square                        0.98                      R_square                        0.98
                      Notes: The t-statistics for the coefficients are reported in parentheses. Symbols *, **, and *** denote significance
                      levels of 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01, respectively. Column (1) and (2) present coefficients of the integration of secondary
                      and tertiary industries, respectively.

                           The results show a significant negative coefficient of RIS in LQSI, indicating that the
                      spatial distribution of the secondary industry is increasingly balanced. On the contrary,
                      the significant positive coefficient of RIS indicates that the tertiary industry is more polar-
                      ized since the implementation of the integration policy. These results demonstrate that
                      the Yangtze River Delta region has displayed a substantial trend of industrial integra-
                      tion since the implementation of RIS. The benchmark regression can reveal a correlation
                      between RIS and industrial integration, but more evidence is required to establish their
                      causative connection.

                      4.2. RIS on Industrial Integration
                           Using the DID model, we conducted an estimation to determine the total impact of
                      RIS on industrial integration. The results are presented in Table 2. Specifically, the first
                      and second columns of the table display the net effect of RIS on the second and third
                      industries, respectively. The first column shows an increasing trend in the range of LQSI
                      coefficients, rising from a range of −1.156~−1.152 to −1.129~−1.107. This indicates that
                      there is an agglomeration of the secondary industry in the YRD, which poses challenges
                      to regional integration. Moreover, the coefficient for RIS, at 0.019, is significantly negative.
                      This indicates that RIS will lead to a reduction in the agglomeration trend of the secondary
                      industry in the YRD.
Land 2023, 12, 1053                                                                                                               9 of 16




                      Table 2. The effect of RIS on industrial integration.

                                                                  (1)                                                       (2)
                                  Variables                                                 Variables
                                                                 LQSI                                                      LQTI
                                            Control             −0.152                               Control               1.360
                                            Treated             −0.156                               Treated               1.353
                         Before                                                    Before
                                                                −0.004                                                    −0.007
                                            Diff(T-C)                                                Diff(T-C)
                                                                (−0.72)                                                 (−0.840)
                                            Control             −0.107                               Control               1.233
                                            Treated             −0.129                               Treated               1.250
                          After                                                    After
                                                              −0.022 ***                                                0.016 ***
                                            Diff(T-C)                                                Diff(T-C)
                                                                 (4.48)                                                    (2.91)
                                                              −0.019 ***                                                0.024 ***
                                      RIS                                                      RIS
                                                                 (2.86)                                                    (2.49)
                                                                 0.005 *                                                  −0.003
                                     GDP                                                      POP
                                                                (1.143)                                                 (−0.472)
                                                               0.097 ***                                                −0.034 ***
                                    pGDP                                                     pGDP
                                                               (22.636)                                                 (−3.404)
                                                              −0.028 ***                                                −0.036 ***
                                     PFE                                                       PFE
                                                               (−5.279)                                                 (−4.772)
                                                                 0.003 *                                                0.020 ***
                                      FAI                                                      PAT
                                                                (0.755)                                                   (8.931)
                                                               0.015 ***                                                0.036 ***
                                      RSI                                                      RSI
                                                                (5.805)                                                  (10.832)
                                                              −0.400 ***                                                0.425 ***
                                    INDS                                                      INDS
                                                              (−63.048)                                                  (38.572)
                                     N                            2178                         N                            2178
                                  R_square                        0.85                      R_square                        0.79
                      Notes: The t-statistics for the coefficients are reported in parentheses. Symbols *, *** denote significance levels
                      of 0.1, 0.01, respectively. Column (1) and (2) present coefficients of the integration of secondary and tertiary
                      industries, respectively.

                            The second column displays the net effect of RIS on the tertiary industry. The co-
                      efficients for the tertiary industry are positive, indicating a growing trend towards con-
                      centration and specialization in the tertiary industry in the YRD. However, the result
                      indicated that such a trend is converging as the range of the LTSI coefficients decreases
                      from 1.353~1.360 to 1.233~1.250. However, the coefficient for RIS is 0.024, which is signifi-
                      cantly positive, suggesting that RIS policies are contributing to the increasing specialization
                      of the tertiary industry in the YRD. In sum, the implementation of RIS has a noticeable pos-
                      itive impact on industrial integration, as it facilitates the spread of the secondary industry
                      and the concentration of the tertiary industry.
                            The impact of RIS on the secondary and tertiary industries runs counter to the sponta-
                      neous evolution trends of the industries. To be specific, entrepreneurial local governments
                      in the YRD have demonstrated intense intercity competition and industry homogenization
                      in order to attract external investments and manufacturing firms [45,46]. As a result of their
                      more sophisticated infrastructure and robust financial capabilities, developed cities have
                      been more successful in luring investments, which has led to a persistent trend of secondary
                      industry concentration and increasing economies of scale. Notably, the coefficient of LQSI
                      is significantly negative, indicating that RIS can play a pivotal role in promoting a more
                      balanced spatial distribution of the secondary industry and mitigating deleterious intercity
                      competition. Li and Wu [47], for instance, suggested that the YRDYP has employed city-
                      regionalism and promoted cross-border collaboration, and turned intercity competition
                      into intercity cooperation effectively.
                            On the contrary, it is observed that the tertiary sector is primarily concentrated in
                      metropolitan areas such as Shanghai’s financial industry, Hangzhou’s internet industry, and
                      Nanjing’s producer services industry. During the experimental period, the location quotient
                      of the tertiary industry displayed a notable decrease, thereby signaling the spillover effects
                      of the tertiary industry. In the years following 2010, the agglomeration degree of the tertiary
                      industry recorded a significant increase of 2.4%, which indicates that the RIS played a role
Land 2023, 12, 1053                                                                                             10 of 16




                      in the concentration of the tertiary industry towards central cities. Scholars in the field
                      of new economic geography have attributed this trend to the increasing returns to scale
                      effect that emerged following the degree of trade freedom [48]. Furthermore, some studies
                      suggest that this is rooted in the tertiary sector, particularly in the financial and internet
                      sectors that require elevated urban platforms to acquire greater financing [49]. In summary,
                      RIS in the YRD has indeed facilitated the establishment of city regions through the lens of
                      industrial structure transformation.

                      4.3. Heterogeneity of RIS on Industrial Integration
                            To verify whether there are externalities, such as agglomeration shadow and borrowed
                      size effects, in the city-regional formation, this paper further uses the DDD model to ex-
                      amine the spatial heterogeneity of the effect of RIS on industrial integration. The results
                      of the DDD model are presented in Table 3, where the first and second columns of the
                      distribution represent the spatial heterogeneity effects of RIS on industrial isomorphism in
                      the secondary and tertiary industries, respectively. The results show that the coefficients
                      of the interaction term between regional integration RIS and dummy variable Sha before
                      the RIS implementation, 0.013 in LQSI and −0.001 in LQTI, respectively, are statistically
                      insignificant. This indicates that there is no significant economic externality caused by re-
                      gional integration in the YRD before RIS implementation. However, in the period following
                      RIS implementation, the coefficients of LQSI and LQTI show statistical significance. Thus,
                      the comparison of the significance before and after implementation indicates that RIS’s
                      industrial integration effect exhibits spatial heterogeneity in the small and medium-sized
                      cities located in the vicinity of the metropolis.
                            In Table 3, the interaction term’s (RIS × Sha) coefficient in column (1) is negative
                      (−0.035) and statistically significant at the 1% level, revealing a significant decrease in
                      the location quotient of the secondary industry in cities that are contiguous to major
                      metropolitan regions. The results also reveal that the coefficient of LQSI in the DID model
                      is negative (−0.019), which is smaller in magnitude than that in the DDD model. These
                      findings suggest that RIS’s integration effect on the secondary industry is more apparent in
                      the cities bordering major metropolises compared to non-bordering cities. This trend may be
                      attributed to enhanced intercity transportation, resulting in spillover effects on land prices
                      in cities adjacent to a metropolis, which disincentivizes manufacturing industries to relocate
                      to these cities. Moreover, it is plausible that RIS has facilitated improved accessibility to
                      transportation throughout the entirety of the YRD, thereby permitting peripheral cities
                      previously hampered by transportation disadvantages to gradually emerge as destinations
                      for relocated manufacturing industries.
                            In terms of the tertiary sector, the coefficient of LQTI is significantly negative (−0.048),
                      indicating that the advantage degree of the tertiary industry of cities bordering major
                      metropolises began to decline after the implementation of RIS. The coefficient of LQTI in the
                      DID model evinces a noteworthy positive impact (0.024), suggesting that in the context of
                      overall RIS-induced augmentation of the third industry location entropy, the third industry
                      edge of the neighboring cities of major metropolitan areas has actually experienced a
                      reduction. Our investigation in Jiaxing highlights the formidable challenge of fostering the
                      growth of the third industry in the interstitial areas between Shanghai and Hangzhou. A
                      significant impediment is the dearth of high-value-added technology enterprises willing
                      to establish themselves in Jiaxing due to the unavailability of suitably skilled human
                      capital in the area. For example, R&D institutions in Jiaxing, including Jiaxing Science and
                      Technology City, XiuZhou National High-tech Zone, and the Yangtze River Delta Research
                      Institute, all confront talent shortages and limited expansion capacity. On the other hand,
                      the proximity of Jiaxing to metropolitan areas results in a considerable proportion of the
                      local populace’s consumption activities being siphoned off by the neighboring metropolises.
                      Notably, residents in Tongxiang, Haining, and Haiyan counties tend to travel to Hangzhou
                      for weekend consumption, while those in Pinghu and Jiashan counties tend to spend their
                      savings in Shanghai.
Land 2023, 12, 1053                                                                                                                                 11 of 16




                                      Table 3. Spatial heterogeneity of RIS on the industrial integration.

                                                              (1)                                                                            (2)
                      Variables                                                                   Variables
                                                             LQSI                                                                           LQTI
                        Control & Shadow                    −0.122                                   Control & Shadow                       1.336
                       Control & n-shadow                   −0.129                                  Control & n-shadow                      1.359
                        Treated & Shadow                    −0.114                                   Treated & Shadow                       1.328
    Before                                                                        Before
                       Treated & n-shadow                   −0.134                                  Treated & n-shadow                      1.352
                                                             0.013                                                                         −0.001
                               Diff(T-C)                                                                   Diff(T-C)
                                                             (1.31)                                                                         (0.08)
                        Control & Shadow                    −0.043                                   Control & Shadow                       1.275
                       Control & n-shadow                   −0.088                                  Control & n-shadow                      1.226
                        Treated & Shadow                    −0.086                                   Treated & Shadow                       1.246
     After                                                                         After
                       Treated & n-shadow                   −0.109                                  Treated & n-shadow                      1.246
                                                          −0.022 **                                                                      −0.049 ***
                               Diff(T-C)                                                                   Diff(T-C)
                                                             (2.02)                                                                         (4.14)
                                                          −0.035 ***                                                                     −0.048 ***
                      RIS × Sha                                                                   RIS × Sha
                                                            (−2.39)                                                                       (−2.78)
                                                             0.005                                                                         −0.002
                        GDP                                                                          POP
                                                            (1.151)                                                                      (−0.269)
                                                           0.094 ***                                                                     −0.034 ***
                       pGDP                                                                         pGDP
                                                           (21.848)                                                                      (−3.382)
                                                          −0.025 ***                                                                     −0.038 ***
                        PFE                                                                          PFE
                                                           (−4.717)                                                                       (−5.01)
                                                             0.003                                                                       0.037 ***
                        FAI                                                                          PAT
                                                            (0.623)                                                                       (10.912)
                                                           0.015 ***                                                                     0.020 ***
                        RSI                                                                          RSI
                                                            (5.821)                                                                        (8.836)
                                                          −0.396 ***                                                                     0.425 ***
                        INDS                                                                        INDS
                                                          (−62.693)                                                                       (38.805)
                         N                                    2178                                   N                                       2178
                      R_square                                0.85                                R_square                                   0.79
                                      Notes: The t-statistics for the coefficients are reported in parentheses. Symbols ** and *** denote significance levels
                                      of 0.05, and 0.01, respectively. Column (1) and (2) present coefficients of the integration of secondary and tertiary
                                      industries, respectively.

                                            To summarize, city regions of the YRD facilitated by RIS have a positive impact on the
                                      agglomeration shadow effect of the tertiary industry, resulting in a decline in the concen-
                                      tration degree and relative advantages of the tertiary industry in the peripheral cities of
                                      metropolitan regions. This effect is more intricate in the secondary industry. The regression
                                      results indicate that the integration effect of the secondary industry induced by RIS is more
                                      conspicuous in the periphery of metropolitan areas, exhibiting the traits of “borrowed
                                      size”. This entails that the spillover of purchasing power from the metropolitan area has
                                      inflated land prices, hastening the exit of the secondary industry. Simultaneously, as this
                                      benefit compounds the withdrawal of the secondary industry, it gives rise to a slump in the
                                      secondary industry in the vicinity of the metropolitan area, which can be regarded as an
                                      “agglomeration shadow”. Consequently, this paper concurs with Meijers and Burger’s [41]
                                      notion that the fundamental mechanism of “borrowed size” and “agglomeration shadow”
                                      is identical.

                                      4.4. Robustness Checks
                                            To ensure the reliability and credibility of our findings, we have performed a parallel
                                       trend test, which validates the significant influence of RIS on industrial integration. One of
                                       the pre-conditions for employing the DID model and the DDD model is that the treatment
                                       group and control groups should have the same trends before the quasi-natural experiment,
                                       as verified through the parallel trend test. The results of the parallel trend test are presented
                                       in Table 4, where the dummy variable Post refers to the year 2010. The coefficients of
                                      ‘RIS × Before n’ represents the change in the dependent variables in the nth year before the
                                       implementation of RIS, while the ‘RIS × After n’ represent that in the nth year after. As
Land 2023, 12, 1053                                                                                                               12 of 16




                      shown in Table 4, the coefficients of the ‘RIS × Before n’ term are statistically insignificant.
                      Instead, after the implementation of RIS, the parameter becomes statistically significant.
                      The observed result aligns with the assumption of parallel trends, which offers additional
                      evidence to support the empirical identification. Furthermore, Table 4 demonstrates that
                      there is a time lag in the impact of RIS on industrial integration. The changes in the LQSI and
                      LQTI did not show statistical significance until the second year after the implementation
                      of RIS.

                      Table 4. Results of the parallel trend test.

                                   Variables                                LQSI                                   LQTI
                                 RIS × Before 2                             0.001                                   0.001
                                                                            −0.03                                  −0.12
                                 RIS × Before 1                             0.002                                  0.007 *
                                                                            −0.5                                   −1.24
                                   RIS × Post                             −0.011 **                              −0.010 **
                                                                           (−2.24)                                (−1.39)
                                 RIS × After 1                              0.002                                 −0.001
                                                                            −0.57                                 (−0.04)
                                 RIS × After 2                            −0.014 ***                             0.011 ***
                                                                           (−3.43)                                 −3.16
                                    Constant                               −0.027                                0.439 **
                                                                           (−0.25)                                 −2.25
                                    City FE                                   Yes                                   Yes
                                    Year FE                                   Yes                                   Yes
                      Notes: The t-statistics for the coefficients are reported in parentheses. Symbols *, **, and *** denote significance
                      levels of 0.1, 0.05, and 0.01, respectively.


                      5. Discussion
                            This study evaluates the net effect of state-led RIS on the dimensions of industrial
                      upgrading in the formation of city regions, which highlights the pivotal role of regional
                      integration strategy in transforming the spatial structure of city regions through industrial
                      restructuring. These policies have catalyzed transportation infrastructure, accelerating
                      socioeconomic activities transfer and flow within the region. Consequently, this has led to
                      spatial restructuring with more intense flows of people, goods, and information, facilitating
                      the transition from hierarchical to networked spatial structures [50]. The results provide
                      evidence of the policy’s impact on spatial structural changes [16], thus providing a valuable
                      reference point for other regions globally that are seeking to promote the formation of city
                      regions and effect industrial restructuring. However, the hypothesis posited by this study
                      is predicated on the impact of state-led strategies and their top-down effect on city regions.
                      The potential presence of bottom-up influences necessitates further exploration [32].
                            Moreover, this article takes into account the heterogeneity of the scale of city-regional
                      formation in different regions. The reform of “province-directly-administered-county”
                      in the YRD has granted county-level governments greater autonomy in economic devel-
                      opment and urbanization [51]. Previous spatial statistical studies on city regions have
                      predominantly posited prefecture-level cities [52], yet these cities are often composed of
                      multiple urban entities. In contrast, county-level units in China exhibit a closer resemblance
                      to a single physical city, with distinct boundaries of the built environment, independent
                      administrative power, and self-contained infrastructure systems. The YRD is characterized
                      by county-based industrial distribution, such as Yiwu in Jinhua City, Zhejiang Province,
                      and Kunshan in Suzhou City, Jiangsu Province. Therefore, using county-level data can pro-
                      vide a more detailed description of the spatial effects of RIS in the YRD and enable a more
                      precise reflection of the process and mechanism of city region formation [52]. Nevertheless,
                      this is not to reiterate that all similar studies should adopt the county-level scale but rather
                      to emphasize that the selection should be based on the socio-economic conditions of the
                      specific study area. In addition, the limitations of the available data precluded a direct
Land 2023, 12, 1053                                                                                                       13 of 16




                      assessment of the interplay among county-level units. As such, this study represents a
                      preliminary exploration that underscores the need for future research to bridge this gap.

                      6. Conclusions
                            This paper examines the impact of the RIS on the formation of city-region and spatial
                      heterogeneity in the Yangtze River Delta, China. Using data from 121 urban entities, this
                      study analyzed the effects of RIS on industrial integration through a DID model and
                      evaluated spatial heterogeneity in potential shadow areas around the metropolis through a
                      DDD model.
                            Based on the DID model, this study unveiled the heterogeneous impact of RIS in the
                      YRD on different industrial sectors, whereby high value-added tertiary industries tend
                      to agglomerate in central cities while secondary industries spread to peripheral regions.
                      As a result, central cities emerge as hubs dominated by “headquarters” and “producer
                      services”, while peripheral regions are typified by “branches” and “manufacturing”. This
                      contributes to the literature about the spatial pattern and heterogeneity of city regions in
                      the industrial dimension [12]. In addition, this article has provided a potential explanation
                      for the causation. It suggests that regional integration policies facilitate factor mobility
                      within the region, leading to a shift from a rent model centered on individual cities to one
                      encompassing the entire region.
                            Drawing on the DDD model, this study investigated agglomeration shadow effects in
                      city regions. RIS has contributed to tertiary industry concentration in central metropolises,
                      resulting in a substantial decline in peripheral areas. Conversely, while these policies have
                      facilitated secondary industry diffusion from metropolitan areas, high land, and housing
                      prices in peripheral regions have led the industry to locate in more remote regions. This
                      helps to explain the reasons behind the formation of “agglomeration shadows”. Through
                      conducting interviews and research in Jiaxing City, this study identifies rapid land price es-
                      calation and inadequate talent attraction as key factors behind the “agglomeration shadow”
                      in city regions, which could be further explored as intermediary variables.
                            On the basis of the principal research findings, we recommend that local governments
                      should meticulously consider the disparities underpinning the developmental substra-
                      tum of industries, regions, and urban economies when pursuing regional integration.
                      Precisely, it is imperative that the divergent repercussions of RIS on the secondary and
                      tertiary sectors ought to be taken into consideration. Concomitantly, city governments
                      with different developmental orientations towards specific industries should adopt distinct
                      policy frameworks to respond effectively to regional integration. This will enable them to
                      harness the individual strengths of each industry to achieve greater regional development.
                      Finally, considering the specific externalities generated by the formation of city regions,
                      local governments should recognize their individual advantages and the laws of regional
                      integration to purposefully strengthen cooperation with neighboring units.

                      Author Contributions: Conceptualization, Y.Z. and D.S.; methodology, Y.Z., D.S. and Y.L.; software,
                      D.S.; validation, Y.Z., D.S. and Y.L.; formal analysis, Y.Z., D.S. and Y.L.; investigation, Y.Z.; resources,
                      Y.Z.; data curation, D.S. and Y.L.; writing—original draft preparation, Y.Z., D.S. and Y.L.; writing
                      review and editing, Y.Z., D.S. and Y.L.; visualization, Y.Z. and D.S.; supervision, Y.Z., D.S. and
                      Y.L.; project administration, Y.Z.; funding acquisition, Y.Z. All authors have read and agreed to the
                      published version of the manuscript.
                      Funding: This research received no external funding.
                      Data Availability Statement: The data will be available on relevant request from the correspond-
                      ing author.
                      Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank all the anonymous reviewers and editors who
                      contributed their time and knowledge to this study.
Land 2023, 12, 1053                                                                                                                      14 of 16




                                       Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The funders had no role in the design
                                       of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or
                                       in the decision to publish the results.

                                       Appendix A

                                       Table A1. Descriptive statistics of variables.

                                                 Variable
    Category               Variable                                   Description              Mean        Std. Dev.      Min          Max
                                                 Symbol
                                                   SecI
                          Secondary                                 Output-value of
                                               (hundred                                        259.97        466.17        2.49       4454.87
                           industry                               secondary industry
                                              million RMB)
                                                   TerI
                                                                    Output-value of
                       Tertiary industry       (hundred                                        232.24        545.51        2.39       7500.59
                                                                    tertiary industry
  Dependence                                  million RMB)
   Variables          Location quotient                            Result of location
                        of secondary              LQSI            quotient analysis of          0.96          0.17         0.26        1.36
                          industry                                secondary industry
                                                                   Result of location
                       Location quotient
                                                  LQTI            quotient analysis of          0.92          0.15         0.60        1.52
                      of tertiary industry
                                                                   tertiary industry
                                                                  1 for cities in sixteen
                        Cities affected
                                                   Treat          core prefecture-level         0.68          0.47         0.00        1.00
                            by RIS
                                                                   cities, 0 for others
                         Cities with                             1 for cities adjacent to
    Dummy             potential shadow             Sha            the municipal areas.,         0.12          0.33         0.00        1.00
    variable               effects                                     0 for others
                                                                  1 for years after RIS
                           Time of
                                                    T                implementing,              0.44          0.50         0.00        1.00
                      implementing RIS
                                                                       0 for others
                              RIS                  RIS             equal to Core ×T             0.30          0.46         0.00        1.00
                          Population             Pop (ten         Permanent resident
                                                                                               93.65         76.71         7.62       680.67
                           number               thousand)            population
                                                                   GDP per resident
                       GDP per capita         pGDP (RMB)                                     43,483.35     36,006.68     2900.00    218,984.10
                                                                     population
                          Fixed-asset          FAI (Billion
                                                                Fixed-asset investment         220.94        410.60        0.32       5176.24
                          investment             RMB)
                          Real estate          REI (Billion
                                                                 Real estate investment        61.42         176.09        0.01       2566.90
                          investment             RMB)
   Covariates
                       Public financial        PFE (Billion         Public financial
                                                                                               55.13         113.50        0.94       1396.89
                        expenditure              RMB)                expenditure
                                                                    The number of
                            Patents                PAT                                        2348.27       4737.55        2.00      49,720.00
                                                                    granted patents
                                                                   Tertiary industry
                          Industrial
                                                  INDS           divided by secondary           0.82          0.33         0.32        4.49
                           structure
                                                                       industry
Land 2023, 12, 1053                                                                                                                 15 of 16




References
1.    Phelps, N.A. External economies, agglomeration and flexible accumulation. Trans. Inst. Br. Geogr. 1992, 17, 35–46. [CrossRef]
2.    Sancton, A. Canadian cities and the new regionalism. J. Urban Aff. 2001, 23, 543–555. [CrossRef]
3.    Ward, K.; Jonas, A.E. Competitive city-regionalism as a politics of space: A critical reinterpretation of the new regionalism.
      Environ. Plan. A 2004, 36, 2119–2139. [CrossRef]
4.    Tomaney, J.; Ward, N. England and th ‘new regionalism’. Reg. Stud. 2000, 34, 471–478. [CrossRef]
5.    Zou, Y. Restructuring Beijing: Upscaling a megacity toward the capital city-region. Urban Geogr. 2022, 43, 1276–1286. [CrossRef]
6.    de Olde, C.; Oosterlynck, S. Taking implementation seriously in the evaluation of urban growth management strategies:
      “Safeguarding the Future” of the Antwerp City-Region. Land 2021, 10, 159. [CrossRef]
7.    Zhang, X.; Kloosterman, R.C. Connecting the ‘workshop of the world’: Intra-and extra-service networks of the Pearl River Delta
      city-region. Reg. Stud. 2016, 50, 1069–1081. [CrossRef]
8.    Lin, G.C. Scaling-up regional development in globalizing China: Local capital accumulation, land-centred politics, and reproduc-
      tion of space. Reg. Stud. 2009, 43, 429–447. [CrossRef]
9.    Moisio, S.; Jonas, A.E. City-regions and city-regionalism. In Handbook on the Geographies of Regions and Territories; Edward Elgar
      Publishing: Cheltenham, UK, 2018; pp. 285–297.
10.   Xu, J.; YeH, A.G. Governance and planning of mega-city regions: Diverse processes and reconstituted state spaces. In Governance
      and Planning of Mega-City Regions; Routledge: London, UK, 2010; pp. 17–42.
11.   Kim, S. Inter-municipal relations in city-region governance. Cities 2020, 104, 102771. [CrossRef]
12.   Taylor, P.J.; Evans, D.M.; Pain, K. Application of the interlocking network model to mega-city-regions: Measuring polycentricity
      within and beyond city-regions. Reg. Stud. 2008, 42, 1079–1093. [CrossRef]
13.   Scott, A.J.; Agnew, J.; Soja, E.W.; Storper, M. Global city-regions: An overview. In Global City Regions; Oxford University Press:
      Oxford, UK, 2001.
14.   Vogel, R.K.; Savitch, H.V.; Xu, J.; Yeh, A.G.O.; Wu, W.; Sancton, A.; Kantor, P.; Newman, P.; Tsukamoto, T.; Cheung, P.T.Y.; et al.
      Governing global city regions in China and the West. Prog. Plan. 2010, 73, 1–75. [CrossRef]
15.   Jonas, A.E.; Ward, K. Introduction to a debate on city-regions: New geographies of governance, democracy and social reproduction.
      Int. J. Urban Reg. Res. 2007, 31, 169–178. [CrossRef]
16.   Zhang, X.; Li, Y.; Zhou, C.; Luan, X.; Yuan, F. Rescaling of the land regime in the making of city-regions: A case study of China’s
      Pearl River Delta. Urban Stud. 2023, 60, 483–500. [CrossRef]
17.   Phelps, N.A.; Fallon, R.J.; Williams, C. Small firms, borrowed size and the urban-rural shift. Reg. Stud. 2001, 35, 613–624.
      [CrossRef]
18.   Burger, M.J.; Meijers, E.J.; Hoogerbrugge, M.M.; Tresserra, J.M. Borrowed size, agglomeration shadows and cultural amenities in
      North-West Europe. Eur. Plan. Stud. 2015, 23, 1090–1109. [CrossRef]
19.   Cardoso, R.V. City-regional demographic composition and the fortunes of regional second cities. Urban Geogr. 2022, 1–23.
      [CrossRef]
20.   Beel, D.; Jones, M. City region limits: Questioning city-centric growth narratives in medium-sized cities. Local Econ. 2021, 36, 3–21.
      [CrossRef]
21.   Cardoso, R.V. Overcoming barriers to institutional integration in European second-tier urban regions. Eur. Plan. Stud. 2016, 24,
      2197–2216. [CrossRef]
22.   Li, L.; Ma, S.; Zheng, Y.; Xiao, X. Integrated regional development: Comparison of urban agglomeration policies in China. Land
      Use Policy 2022, 114, 105939. [CrossRef]
23.   Yang, L.; Chen, W.; Wu, F.; Li, Y.; Sun, W. State-guided city regionalism: The development of metro transit in the city region of
      Nanjing. Territ. Politics Gov. 2021, 1–21. [CrossRef]
24.   de Castro, C.P.; Dos Santos, G.F.; de Freitas, A.D.; Dos Santos, M.I.; Andrade, R.F.S.; Barreto, M.L. Socio-economic urban scaling
      properties: Influence of regional geographic heterogeneities in Brazil. PLoS ONE 2020, 15, e0242778. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25.   Fujita, M.; Krugman, P.R.; Venables, A. The Spatial Economy: Cities, Regions, and International Trade; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA,
      USA, 2001.
26.   Taylor, P.J. Specification of the world city network. Geogr. Anal. 2001, 33, 181–194. [CrossRef]
27.   Taylor, P.J.; Derudder, B. World City Network: A Global Urban Analysis; Psychology Press: London, UK, 2004.
28.   Porter, M.E. Competitive advantage, agglomeration economies, and regional policy. Int. Reg. Sci. Rev. 1996, 19, 85–90. [CrossRef]
29.   Parr, J.B. Agglomeration economies: Ambiguities and confusions. Environ. Plan. A 2002, 34, 717–731. [CrossRef]
30.   Camagni, R.P.; Salone, C. Network urban structures in northern Italy: Elements for a theoretical framework. Urban Stud. 1993, 30,
      1053–1064. [CrossRef]
31.   Zhang, X.; Chen, Y.; Xu, Y.; Yue, W.; Tang, C. Does regional cooperation constrain urban sprawl? Evidence from the Guangdong-
      Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area. Landsc. Urban Plan. 2023, 235, 104742. [CrossRef]
32.   Zhang, X.; Shen, J.; Sun, Y.; Zhou, C.; Yang, Y. Formation of city regions from bottom-up initiatives: Investigating coalitional
      developmentalism in the Pearl River Delta. Ann. Am. Assoc. Geogr. 2023, 113, 700–716. [CrossRef]
33.   Wu, F. China’s Emergent City-Region Governance: A New Form of State Spatial Selectivity through State-orchestrated Rescaling.
      Int. J. Urban Reg. Res. 2016, 40, 1134–1151. [CrossRef]
Land 2023, 12, 1053                                                                                                                 16 of 16




34.   Li, Z.; Xu, J.; Yeh, A.G. State rescaling and the making of city-regions in the Pearl River Delta, China. Environ. Plan. C Gov. Policy
      2014, 32, 129–143. [CrossRef]
35.   Harrison, J.; Hoyler, M. Governing the new metropolis. Urban Stud. 2014, 51, 2249–2266. [CrossRef]
36.   Brenner, N. Open questions on state rescaling. Camb. J. Reg. Econ. Soc. 2009, 2, 123–139. [CrossRef]
37.   Li, Y.; Yuan, F. Business-promoted city-regionalism? New industrial city projects by China fortune land development. Reg. Stud.
      2022, 56, 355–370. [CrossRef]
38.   Harrison, J.; Hoyler, M.; Derudder, B.; Liu, X.; Meijers, E. Governing polycentric urban regions. Territ. Politics Gov. 2023, 11,
      213–221. [CrossRef]
39.   Li, Y.; Wu, F.; Hay, I. City-region integration policies and their incongruous outcomes: The case of Shantou-Chaozhou-Jieyang
      city-region in east Guangdong Province, China. Habitat Int. 2015, 46, 214–222. [CrossRef]
40.   Liu, Y.; Zhang, X.; Pan, X.; Ma, X.; Tang, M. The spatial integration and coordinated industrial development of urban agglomera-
      tions in the Yangtze River Economic Belt, China. Cities 2020, 104, 102801. [CrossRef]
41.   Meijers, E.J.; Burger, M.J. Stretching the concept of ‘borrowed size’. Urban Stud. 2017, 54, 269–291. [CrossRef]
42.   Volgmann, K.; Rusche, K. The geography of borrowing size: Exploring spatial distributions for German urban regions. Tijdschr.
      Voor Econ. En Soc. Geogr. 2020, 111, 60–79. [CrossRef]
43.   Capello, R. The city network paradigm: Measuring urban network externalities. Urban Stud. 2000, 37, 1925–1945. [CrossRef]
44.   Alonso, W. Urban zero population growth. Daedalus 1973, 102, 191–206.
45.   Xu, J. Governing city-regions in China: Theoretical issues and perspectives for regional strategic planning. Town Plan. Rev. 2008,
      79, 157–185. [CrossRef]
46.   Zhang, X.; Shen, J.; Gao, X. Towards a comprehensive understanding of intercity cooperation in China’s city-regionalization: A
      comparative study of Shenzhen-Hong Kong and Guangzhou-Foshan city groups. Land Use Policy 2021, 103, 105339. [CrossRef]
47.   Li, Y.; Wu, F. Understanding city-regionalism in China: Regional cooperation in the Yangtze River Delta. Reg. Stud. 2018, 52,
      313–324. [CrossRef]
48.   Krugman, P. Increasing returns and economic geography. J. Political Econ. 1991, 99, 483–499. [CrossRef]
49.   Sassen, S. The Global City: New York, London, Tokyo; Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ, USA, 2013.
50.   Harrison, J. From competitive regions to competitive city-regions: A new orthodoxy, but some old mistakes. J. Econ. Geogr. 2007,
      7, 311–332. [CrossRef]
51.   Li, Y.; Wu, F. Reconstructing urban scale: New experiments with the “provincial administration of counties” reform in China.
      China Rev. 2014, 14, 147–173.
52.   You, S.; Chen, X. Regional integration degree and its effect on a city’s green growth in the Yangtze River Delta: Research based on
      a single-city regional integration index. Clean Technol. Environ. Policy 2021, 23, 1837–1849. [CrossRef]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
