[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: journal/A21-gong-zhong-2021-the-impact-of-borrowing-size-on-the-economic-development-of-small-and-medium-sized-cities-in-china-10.3390-land10020134.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Title:           The Impact of Borrowing Size on the Economic Development of Small and Medium-Sized Cities in China
Subject:         Sharing the economic agglomeration effects of large cities is considered an effective way to enhance economic growth in small and medium-sized cities, yet there remains a lack of relevant quantitative empirical research. In this study, the three dimensions of borrowing size of 285 prefecture-level cities and nighttime lighting data from 2004 to 2013 in China are used to assess its effect on economic development by a fixed-effects model with panel data. The results show that first, the effect of borrowing size on small and medium-sized cities’ economic development is significantly positive. In contrast, the effect of borrowing size on large cities is not significant. Second, the magnitude of the impact of borrowing size on small and medium-sized cities varies considerably across regions. In middle and western China, the most significant positive effect is from borrowing economic activity density and borrowing advanced functions. However, in eastern China, the most significant positive effect is from borrowing population, while borrowing advanced functions has a significant negative effect. In the northeast, borrowing economic activity density has a significant positive effect. This article provides policy recommendations in three areas: improving intercity accessibility, rationalizing the layout of urban industries, and supporting the development of education.
Keywords:        borrowing size; small and medium-sized cities; city network; prefecture-level city; regional coordination
Author:          Xiaoxia Gong and Fanglei Zhong
Creator:         LaTeX with hyperref
Producer:        GPL Ghostscript 9.55.0
CreationDate:    Mon Aug 10 23:14:26 2026 WIB
ModDate:         Mon Aug 10 23:14:26 2026 WIB
Custom Metadata: no
Metadata Stream: yes
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            none
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           19
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       595 x 842 pts (A4)
Page rot:        0
File size:       711351 bytes
Optimized:       no
PDF version:     1.7
[Extracted Text]
                                                  3.5        6.4




Article


The Impact of Borrowing Size on
the Economic Development of
Small and Medium-Sized Cities in
China

Xiaoxia Gong and Fanglei Zhong




                                 https://doi.org/10.3390/land10020134
              land
Article
The Impact of Borrowing Size on the Economic Development of
Small and Medium-Sized Cities in China
Xiaoxia Gong 1 and Fanglei Zhong 2, *

                                          1   School of Management, Northwest Minzu University, Lanzhou 730030, China; 273972033@xbmu.edu.cn
                                          2   School of Economics, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, China
                                          *   Correspondence: zfl@lzu.edu.cn; Tel.: +86-139-9312-7625


                                          Abstract: Sharing the economic agglomeration effects of large cities is considered an effective way
                                          to enhance economic growth in small and medium-sized cities, yet there remains a lack of relevant
                                          quantitative empirical research. In this study, the three dimensions of borrowing size of 285 prefecture-
                                          level cities and nighttime lighting data from 2004 to 2013 in China are used to assess its effect on
                                          economic development by a fixed-effects model with panel data. The results show that first, the effect
                                          of borrowing size on small and medium-sized cities’ economic development is significantly positive.
                                          In contrast, the effect of borrowing size on large cities is not significant. Second, the magnitude of the
                                          impact of borrowing size on small and medium-sized cities varies considerably across regions. In
                                          middle and western China, the most significant positive effect is from borrowing economic activity
                                          density and borrowing advanced functions. However, in eastern China, the most significant positive
                                          effect is from borrowing population, while borrowing advanced functions has a significant negative
                                          effect. In the northeast, borrowing economic activity density has a significant positive effect. This
                                          article provides policy recommendations in three areas: improving intercity accessibility, rationalizing
                                          the layout of urban industries, and supporting the development of education.

                                Keywords: borrowing size; small and medium-sized cities; city network; prefecture-level city;
         
                                          regional coordination
Citation: Gong, X.; Zhong, F. The
Impact of Borrowing Size on the
Economic Development of Small and
Medium-Sized Cities in China. Land        1. Introduction
2021, 10, 134. https://doi.org/
                                               The development of small and medium-sized cities is an important aspect of healthy
10.3390/land10020134
                                          urban agglomeration in metropolitan areas [1]. As a key factor connecting urban and
                                          rural areas—the development of small and medium-sized cities—is related to the specific
Received: 24 December 2020
Accepted: 28 January 2021
                                          implementation of the new urbanization program in China [2]. Its development is not only
Published: 31 January 2021
                                          an important starting point for balancing efficiency and fairness in relation to high-quality
                                          urban development, but also an important means of promoting coordinated regional
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
                                          development [3,4]. Thus, the “Key Tasks for New Urbanization Construction in 2019”
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
                                          issued by the National Development and Reform Commission of China on 31 March 2019
published maps and institutional affil-   stated that to achieve high-quality urbanization, attention must be paid to the development
iations.                                  of various-sized cities in urban agglomerations, and thus the development of small and
                                          medium-sized cities should be supported. The “Opinions of the Central Committee of
                                          the Communist Party of China and the State Council on Establishing and Improving the
                                          Urban-Rural Integration Development System, Mechanism and Policy System” issued on
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
                                          15 April 2019 proposed that urban agglomeration should be the main form of promotion of
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                          the coordinated development of large, medium-sized, and small cities, and small towns.
This article is an open access article
                                               However, the development of small and medium-sized cities is not consistent across
distributed under the terms and           the various regions in China. For example, small cities in the Yangtze River Delta and the
conditions of the Creative Commons        Pearl River Delta dominate the top 100 counties in the country [4–6], while “the poverty belt
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://     around Beijing and Tianjin” and “the lamp shadow area” continue to exist [3,7]. Traditional
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/          theories have mainly analyzed the dual roles of large cities in the agglomeration of and
4.0/).                                    diffusion toward neighboring small cities, emphasizing the dominant position of large



Land 2021, 10, 134. https://doi.org/10.3390/land10020134                                                      https://www.mdpi.com/journal/land
Land 2021, 10, 134                                                                                              2 of 18




                     cities in the urban system, while ignoring the active role that small and medium-sized
                     cities can play in the urban system [8–10]. How do we improve the economic growth of
                     small and medium-sized cities? What are the reasons for the differences in the levels of
                     economic development of small and medium-sized cities? In this study, we introduce the
                     concept of “borrowing size” and analyze the impact of borrowing size on the economic
                     development of small and medium-sized cities from the perspective of the national urban
                     network [11]. Using nighttime lighting data for 285 prefecture-level cities in China from
                     2004 to 2013, we use empirical analysis to identify both favorable and unfavorable factors
                     related to the economic development of small and medium-sized cities in an effort to
                     identify shortcomings and provide policy recommendations that will help to promote the
                     healthy economic development of these cities, thereby helping to coordinate China’s new
                     urbanization and regional development and increase both efficiency and equity.

                     2. Literature Review and Hypotheses
                            There has long been debate on whether China’s urbanization program should prior-
                     itize the development of large cities or that of small and medium-sized cities. Scholars
                     advocating the development of large cities have conducted their analyses from the perspec-
                     tive of agglomeration and economies of scale [8,9,12], stating that the expansion of the city
                     scale can increase the benefits provided by agglomeration [13–17]. However, the develop-
                     ment of big cities also creates diseconomies of scale such as diminishing marginal returns
                     from factor inputs [18] and urban environmental pollution [19,20]. Scholars who advocate
                     the development of small and medium-sized cities believe that the priority development of
                     these cities is conducive to rapid urbanization [21], which can reduce the psychological
                     costs of rural labor entering the city and achieve a better combination of urban and rural
                     markets [21,22].
                            Numerous scholars have focused on the issue of urban scale and economic develop-
                     ment over a long period of time. China’s urbanization program has experienced problems
                     related to insufficient growth and structural imbalance, with the latter embodied in the
                     insufficient or even shrinking scale of small and medium-sized cities [15]. Shanzi Ke
                     conducted an empirical study using panel data from prefecture-level cities and found that
                     cities need to reach a certain threshold scale to obtain the benefits of industrial linkages [12].
                     However, most prefecture-level cities in China have not yet reached the threshold [15,23].
                     It is difficult for small and medium-sized cities to obtain scale and agglomeration bene-
                     fits [10,24,25]. However, some studies have shown that the size of a city does not seem
                     to limit its development. For example, a large number of small and medium-sized cities
                     in China’s Yangtze River Delta urban agglomeration have an average GDP growth rate
                     that is higher than the regional average growth rate and that of some large cities [5]. This
                     finding does not conform to the traditional theory of agglomeration economics. Meijers
                     et al. [1,26,27] found that agglomeration has a positive effect on productivity. However, other
                     factors unrelated to city size are also important in promoting the benefits of urbanization.
                            Given the increasing level of connection among cities, studies on urban networks have
                     become increasingly popular [6,28–30]. In 1950, Zonneveld first proposed the concept of an
                     “urban network” based on the economies of scale produced by improved transportation
                     and information channels [30–32]. In 1974, Rolfs proposed that the phenomenon that the
                     product value increases as the number of its users increases should be termed “network
                     externality” [33]. “Urban network externality” involves the expansion and extension of the
                     concept of network externality used in the field of urban economics [34–36]. Capello [37]
                     was the first to propose the concept of urban network externality, stating that cities can
                     obtain economic benefits through the synergy and complementarity generated by the
                     functional networks constructed among cities. Urban network externalities can be either
                     positive or negative. Positive urban network externalities are mainly reflected in “borrow-
                     ing size” [38]. In 1973, the famous planner and economist Alonso put forward the concept
                     of “borrowing size” in “Urban Zero Population Growth” [39]. From the perspective of the
                     urban system, he believed that we should examine not only the optimal size of a single
Land 2021, 10, 134                                                                                            3 of 18




                     city, but also the scale of cities that interact with each other [40–42]. Hepworth found that
                     the development of communications technology had enhanced the borrowing capacity of
                     small cities around London, which had led to the deurbanization of London [43]. Phelps
                     examined the relationship between the local economy of small towns and neighboring
                     large cities from the perspective of borrowing size and found that increased borrowing
                     size enabled enterprises to achieve transformation and development in the context of rural
                     urbanization [40,44].
                           Subsequent studies found that borrowing size in small cities is not entirely dependent
                     on their proximity to large cities [38,45]. Proximity to large cities does not necessarily
                     enable small cities to obtain development opportunities through increased borrowing
                     size [44,46]. Some scholars have divided the borrowing size of small towns into three
                     types. The first type is small towns adjacent to big cities, who can borrow size from the
                     big cities; the second is a cluster of adjacent small towns, who can borrow size from one
                     another; and the third is small towns that are neither adjacent to big cities nor adjacent
                     to other small towns, who can borrow size through the city network. The principle
                     of borrowing size provides various development strategies for different types of small
                     towns [47]. Yao and Song used China’s eight national-level urban agglomerations and
                     surrounding non-urban prefecture-level cities as research objects, and using systematic
                     generalized method of moments and other empirical estimation methods found that small
                     and medium-sized cities can enjoy the benefits of a large-city-generating agglomeration
                     economy by borrowing size [5]. However, urban network externalities are not always
                     beneficial to city development [10,44,46]. Meijers et al. pointed out that the negative effects
                     of urban network externalities manifest as agglomeration shadows [7,47–50] that mainly
                     arise from competition among cities [51–55]. Small cities face pressure from large cities, as
                     well as pressure from neighboring small cities in a competition for survival, which limits
                     their development [52]. Bindong Sun and Song Ding used 108 small cities in the Yangtze
                     River Delta urban agglomeration in China as research objects and found no direct evidence
                     for the existence of agglomeration shadows, providing empirical support for the concept
                     of borrowing size [53]. Therefore, urban network externalities suggest that borrowing
                     size and agglomeration shadows can exist simultaneously. However, for a given city, the
                     intensities of these two effects generally differ [10,48].
                           Our review of the literature revealed the following findings. First, the research objects
                     of most previous studies on borrowing size are developed countries in Europe and America
                     in the latter stages of urbanization, with few studies focused on developing countries,
                     even though numerous developing countries are currently undergoing a period of rapid
                     urbanization, especially China. Second, there are disagreements regarding the concept of
                     borrowing size. Scholars have tended to define the concept based on their own research
                     requirements, rather than applying a universally accepted definition of borrowing size,
                     which has created a degree of confusion. Third, at present, the research objects in studies
                     on borrowing size in China are mainly at the national level of urban agglomerations. Few
                     scholars have analyzed borrowing size from the perspective of the four major regions
                     (the east, middle, west, and northeast) in China or the respective levels of economic
                     development in northern and southern China. Fourth, in terms of setting distance weights,
                     Chinese scholars currently use one of two methods: The first involves using Euclidean
                     distances, while the second involves evaluating the intercity network connections based on
                     train travel time within the network. Both methods have some limitations.
                           Following Yao and Song [5], in this study we define borrowing size as the process
                     whereby a given city accesses scale benefits through participating in a network with
                     other cities or regions. Borrowing size includes three dimensions: borrowing population,
                     borrowing economic activity density, and borrowing advanced functions. Adopting the
                     perspectives of spatial interaction theory, absolute advantage theory, comparative advan-
                     tage theory, flow space theory, and network externality theory, we analyze the mechanism
                     by which borrowing size influences the economic development of small and medium-sized
                     cities and propose and test several hypotheses.
Land 2021, 10, 134                                                                                           4 of 18




                          Borrowing population is related to potential market size. The larger the borrowed
                     population, the larger the markets for both production factors and products. This provides
                     an important source of economies of scale in small and medium-sized cities, and helps to
                     offset the shortcomings of these cities and promote their economic development [56]. For
                     producers in small and medium-sized cities, the larger the borrowed population, the larger
                     and more elastic the labor market, which increases the probability of matching people with
                     jobs. An abundant labor supply can also reduce employment costs to some extent [57],
                     thereby reducing production costs and enhancing competitiveness. For businesses in small
                     and medium-sized cities, the size of the borrowed population represents the size of the
                     potential consumer market. The larger the borrowed population, the larger the potential
                     market for the sale of goods and services. For consumers, the expansion of the potential
                     market is conducive to finding jobs that match their skills, thereby increasing income
                     and raising consumption levels. However, the borrowed population is a relatively static
                     indicator that does not necessarily reflect the level of economic activity, and thus it has an
                     insignificant effect on the economic development of small and medium-sized cities.

                     Hypothesis 1: An increase in population can promote the economic development of small and
                     medium-sized cities, but the effect is relatively insignificant.

                           Economic activity density refers to the knowledge spillovers between various in-
                     dustries and reflects the degree of urbanization of the economy (the Jacobs externality
                     effect [58]). As knowledge is public and non-exclusive, when companies use their knowl-
                     edge to carry out innovative activities and increase productivity, they do not reduce the
                     effectiveness of that knowledge. Further, companies in other industries can also bene-
                     fit from this process. However, knowledge spillovers are, to some extent, constrained
                     by space and the effects of localization [59]. Therefore, only by strengthening the links
                     between economic activities in all walks of life and enabling enterprises to move closer
                     to knowledge-intensive areas can advanced knowledge be transformed into production
                     efficiency. However, if firms move closer to knowledge-intensive areas, on the one hand,
                     the cost of acquiring knowledge decreases, but on the other hand, rental costs increase,
                     thereby offsetting the benefits of acquiring new knowledge. Therefore, companies dis-
                     tant from knowledge-intensive areas (generally major cities) rely on urban networks to
                     strengthen their connections with those cities, that is, increase their borrowing of eco-
                     nomic activity density to acquire knowledge, promote innovation, and improve production
                     efficiency [60,61].

                     Hypothesis 2: An increase in economic activity density can promote the economic development of
                     small and medium-sized cities.

                           The economic relationships between cities are mainly facilitated by urban func-
                     tions [59]. The impact of borrowing advanced functions on the development of small
                     and medium-sized cities is mainly achieved through the division of labor among functional
                     spaces in those cities. From the perspective of the industrial chain, major cities and small
                     and medium-sized cities have strengthened their economic ties through the division of
                     labor, increasing their economies of scale and enabling large, medium-sized, and small
                     cities to form symbiotic and mutually beneficial relationships. Entrepreneurs in the inter-
                     city network can share facilities such as warehousing and business services to improve
                     efficiency and optimize resource allocation. Consumers in small and medium-sized cities
                     can access entertainment, culture, education, and other functions in the central city through
                     network connections, which satisfies the diversity of consumer demand while enabling
                     consumers to continue to live in small and medium-sized cities where housing costs are
                     lower, thereby maximizing their personal utility. However, if a region has a preference
                     for a specific high-level industry, cities in that region will gradually deviate from their
                     previous local comparative advantages because of the homogeneous industrial structure.
                     Intense competition between industries and market segmentation will reduce the overall
Land 2021, 10, 134                                                                                            5 of 18




                     economies of scale in the region [62], which will reduce the original innovation incen-
                     tive provided by the attraction of advanced industries and limit improvements in urban
                     productivity to a certain extent.

                     Hypothesis 3: Borrowing advanced functions has a dual effect on the economic development of
                     small and medium-sized cities.


                     3. Data and Methods
                     3.1. Data Sources and Processing
                          Nighttime lighting intensity provides an objective measure of daily economic activity,
                     and includes some informal areas of the economy that are not included in GDP estimates.
                     Therefore, in this study, we use nighttime lighting density to measure the level of urban
                     economic development [63]. The nighttime lighting data were obtained from 34 reports
                     issued over the 22-year period from 1992 to 2013 by the National Geophysical Data Center
                     within the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The nighttime lighting used
                     in this study mainly includes lights from cities, towns, and other locations with continuous
                     lighting (including gas flares), while short-term lighting events such as fires, sun glare, and
                     the aurora were removed. The background noise is set to zero, and the range of DN (Digital
                     Number) is 1–63. However, the original nighttime lighting data cannot be directly used to
                     study cities. Thus, we adopted the method proposed by Zhang and Pan [64] to implement
                     continuity correction, pixel saturation, and abnormal value processing in relation to the
                     nighttime lighting data from 2004 to 2013. The grid values of the nighttime lighting data
                     are summed using the prefecture-level city as the boundary, and the total DN value of
                     the nighttime lighting of the prefecture-level city in the study area is obtained, followed
                     by the per capita DN value. The processed nighttime lighting data better reflects the
                     economic development of the prefecture-level city, and is more appropriate for cross-year
                     and cross-regional comparisons.
                          The economic data were mainly obtained from the 2005–2014 editions of the China
                     City Statistical Yearbook. Due to incomplete data for some prefecture-level cities (such
                     as Haidong, Tongren, Bijie, Lhasa, and Sansha), we eliminated those regions, leaving a
                     sample of 285 prefecture-level cities. Although there have been some administrative name
                     changes in some prefecture-level cities, we have retained the original names to maintain
                     the integrity of the sample.
                          The scope of this study includes prefecture-level cities, rather than municipal districts.
                     Regarding the weighted distance matrix, we do not use a spatial distance matrix, but
                     rather use a 285 × 285 matrix composed of the shortest highway routes between cities. The
                     data used to determine these routes include 81,225 distance values obtained from 2345
                     Intercity Highway Distance Search Tool (http://tools.2345.com/jiaotong/lc.htm). We used
                     MATLAB software to measure the three dimensions of borrowing size, and used ArcGIS to
                     display and analyze the temporal and spatial distributions of borrowing size and nighttime
                     lighting data.

                     3.2. Measurement of Borrowing Size
                         On the basis of previous domestic and foreign studies, we used the cities in the national
                     urban network to measure the three dimensions of borrowing size (borrowing population,
                     borrowing economic activity density, and borrowing advanced functions) as follows:
                         borrowing population (bpop):

                                                                284   popm
                                                    bpopi = ∑m=1           , ∀i 6 = m                            (1)
                                                                      wi,m
Land 2021, 10, 134                                                                                                                                       6 of 18




                                       borrowing economic activity density (bden):

                                                                                              284   denm
                                                                              bdeni = ∑m=1               , ∀i 6 = m                                         (2)
                                                                                                    wi,m

                                       borrowing advanced functions (bfun):

                                                                                              284   funm
                                                                               bfuni = ∑m=1              , ∀i 6 = m                                         (3)
                                                                                                    wi,m

                                      where i and m represent two cities in the national city network, popm represents the popula-
                                      tion of city m, denm represents the economic activity density of city m, funm represents the
                                      advanced functions of city m, and wi,m represents the shortest distance by road between
                                      city i and city m.
                                            To measure economic activity density (den), we draw on the method proposed by
                                      Yao and Song [5] and use the density of urban passenger transport systems. Thus, eco-
                                      nomic activity density = (total annual urban railway, highway, water, and air passenger
                                      transport)/built-up areas/365.
                                            Advanced functions (fun) are usually measured by the proportion of the total labor
                                      force in a city that is engaged in high-end occupations. On the basis of data availability and
                                      Liu’s research [3,42], we used high-end service industries (including transportation, storage
                                      and delivery, information transmission, computing services and software, finance, real
                                      estate, leasing and business services, scientific research, technical services, and geological
                                      prospecting industries) and the ratio of the number of employees in these industries to that
                                      in the manufacturing industry to measure borrowing advanced functions.

                                       3.3. Measurement Model Settings
                                           This study mainly explores the impact of the three dimensions of borrowing size
                                      (borrowing population, borrowing economic activity density, and borrowing advanced
                                      functions) on the economic development of small and medium-sized cities. The benchmark
                                      model is set as

    lightpi,t = β0 + β1 bpopi,t−1 + β2 bfuni,t−1 + β3 bdeni,t−1 + β4 lnpopi,t−1 + β5 lnpop2i,t−1 + β6 pinvesti,t−1 + β7 pfdi,t−1 + β8 pedui,t−1 + εi,t      (4)

                                           where t represents the year and i represents the i-th prefecture-level city. The explained
                                      variable lightp represents urban productivity, while the independent variable bpop is the
                                      population that can be borrowed by the prefecture-level city, bfun is the advanced functions
                                      that can be borrowed by the prefecture-level city, bden is the economic activity density that
                                      can be borrowed by the prefecture-level city, lnpop is the scale of the prefecture-level city,
                                      lnpop2 is the quadratic term of lnpop, pinvest is the fixed asset investment level, pfdi is
                                      the foreign direct investment level, and pedu is the local human capital level.
                                           It must be pointed out that given the possibility of mutual causality between the
                                      prefecture-level city’s current borrowing size, population, advanced functions, economic
                                      activity density, capital investment, foreign direct investment, human capital and other
                                      variables, and current urban productivity, the independent variables in this model are
                                      all processed with a lag. To reduce the heteroscedasticity of the model, the population
                                      variables in relation to prefecture-level cities take a logarithmic form.

                                       3.4. Index Selection and Data Description
                                           Regarding the explained variables, we drew on Liu Xiuyan’s approach [3,42] and used
                                      per capita nighttime lighting brightness (lightp) to indicate the level of urban economic
                                      development, making the results more objective and complete.
                                           Regarding the explanatory variables, the three dimensions of borrowing size (bfun,
                                      bpop, and bden) are all calculated using the method described in Section 3.2.
                                           Regarding the control variables, on the basis of the literature review, we used the
                                      logarithmic values of the populations of prefecture-level cities (lnpop), while fun is the
Land 2021, 10, 134                                                                                            7 of 18




                     local advanced functions, den is the local economic activity density, and the fixed asset
                     investment level (pinvest) is the amount of investment in fixed assets included in the
                     current year’s GDP. pfdi is the proportion of foreign direct investment in the current year’s
                     GDP in CNY, pedu is the proportion of college students among the total population of the
                     prefecture-level city, and pgov is the proportion of government expenditure included in
                     the year’s GDP.
                          Regarding the comparability and completeness of the data, the data used in this study
                     mainly come from the China City Statistical Yearbook (2005–2014). Given the possibility of
                     an inverted U-shaped relationship between urban population and urban productivity, the
                     quadratic form of the urban population logarithm (lnpop2) was used.

                     4. Results
                     4.1. Spatiotemporal Evolution of Nighttime Lighting Density and Borrowing Size
                           Figure 1 shows the spatiotemporal distribution of nighttime lighting density in the
                     prefecture-level cities studied in 2004, 2009, and 2013. In the figure, the areas with higher
                     levels of nighttime lighting brightness per capita are mainly distributed in economically
                     developed areas or areas with an average level of economic development and relatively
                     small populations. For example, in 2004, the only prefecture-level cities with a per capita
                     nighttime lighting brightness DN value of more than 20 units were Shenzhen, Dongguan,
                     Jia Yuguan, and Karamay, with the first two cities located in economically developed
                     regions and the other two in regions with relatively small populations. By 2009, Zhongshan
                     City, Foshan City, Shenzhen City, Wuhai City, and Ordos City were included in the list
                     of cities with a per capita nighttime lighting brightness DN value exceeding 20 units. By
                     2013, the number of prefecture-level cities whose per capita nighttime lighting brightness
                     DN value exceeded 20 units had increased to 15. From the spatial perspective, cities with
                     high levels of per capita nighttime lighting brightness tend to be distributed in coastal
                     areas, the middle and lower reaches of the Yangtze River area, and the Bohai Bay area,
                     which is basically consistent with the economic development levels of China’s small and
                     medium-sized cities.




                     Figure 1. Spatiotemporal distribution of nighttime lighting density.

                           Figure 2 shows the spatiotemporal distribution of borrowing population by the
                     prefecture-level cities in the study area. It can be seen that cities borrowing population
                     are mainly concentrated in the North China Plain and the Middle and Lower Yangtze
                     Plains. These areas were developed earlier and are now densely populated, including
                     the most populated provinces such as Henan, Hebei, and Shandong. In addition, these
                     regions have relatively flat terrain, dense road networks, and good regional accessibility.
                     Therefore, prefecture-level cities in these regions borrow relatively large populations. Cities
                     that borrow populations of less than 50 units are mainly distributed in the northwestern
                     frontier areas, such as Urumqi and Karamay. In terms of temporal distribution, the level of
                     borrowing population has remained relatively stable overall, with only a slight increase.
                     This stability in relation to the spatiotemporal distribution of borrowing population mainly
                     reflects the slow growth rate of the Chinese population as a result of the decline in the birth
                     rate in recent decades.
Land 2021, 10, 134                                                                                                 8 of 18




                            Figure 2. Spatiotemporal distribution of borrowing population.

                               Figure 3 shows the spatiotemporal distribution of borrowing advanced functions by
                          prefecture-level cities in the study area in 2004, 2009, and 2013. It can be seen that the
                          number of prefecture-level cities with higher levels of borrowing advanced functions has
                          declined, then increased, and then declined again. This has mainly been caused by the
                          relative strength of the high-end service industry and the manufacturing industry. It is
                          well-known that the global financial crisis triggered by the subprime mortgage crisis in
                          the United States in 2007 had a dramatic impact on industrial development worldwide.
                          The crisis caused a substantial reduction in the orders of China’s exporters, which in turn
                          led to business closures, bankruptcies, and mass layoffs. When facing a financial crisis,
                          the general manufacturing industry is more vulnerable than the high-tech industry [65].
                          Therefore, in 2009, when the advanced functions of the prefecture-level cities were larger,
                          the advanced functions that could be borrowed were also larger. By 2013, following the
                          recovery of the global economy and China’s emphasis on the development of the real
                          economy, even though the high-end service industry had recovered to a certain extent, it
                          remained relatively weak compared with the manufacturing industry. Thus, borrowing
                          advanced functions by prefecture-level cities remained lower in 2013 than in 2009.




                       Figure 3. Spatiotemporal distribution of borrowing advanced functions.

                                Figure 4 shows the spatiotemporal distribution of borrowing economic activity density
                          by prefecture-level cities in the study area. It can be seen that the number of prefecture-level
                          cities with higher levels of borrowing economic activity density gradually increased. In
                          2004, there were only three prefecture-level cities with a level of borrowing economic
                          activity density higher than 0.14 units, but by 2009 this number had increased to 12, and
                          by 2013 it had increased to 46. In general, borrowing economic activity density is highly
                          dependent on location-related factors. Areas with a higher level of borrowing economic
                          activity density are located in the center of the studied area, while areas with a lower level
                          of borrowing economic activity density are generally located at the edge of the studied area.




                     Figure 4. Spatiotemporal distribution of borrowing economic activity density.
Land 2021, 10, 134                                                                                                                                   9 of 18




                                      4.2. Regression Analysis
                                            To examine the impact of borrowing size on the economic development of small and
                                      medium-sized cities, among the 285 prefecture-level cities for which the data is available,
                                      we use the 254 small and medium-sized prefecture-level cities as the research objects
                                      while the other 31 large prefecture-level cities (including provincial administrative centers
                                      and municipalities directly under the central government in Shenzhen) were used as the
                                      research reference. Empirical testing based on the socioeconomic data and nighttime
                                      lighting data for prefecture-level cities in China from 2004 to 2013 was conducted using a
                                      fixed-effects model and panel data.
                                            Table 1 shows the results of the regression analysis of the impact of borrowing size on
                                      urban economic development in cities at prefecture level and above (classified as small and
                                      medium-sized cities, and large cities, respectively). Overall, for small and medium-sized
                                      cities, the core explanatory variables are significant at the 1% level. Further, with the
                                      addition of core explanatory variables, the goodness of fit increases from 0.326 to 0.401,
                                      meaning that the explanatory power of the model has increased. From the perspective
                                      of the direction and effect of the core explanatory variables on the explained variables,
                                      borrowing population, borrowing economic activity density, and borrowing advanced
                                      functions all have a positive effect on the economic development of small and medium-
                                      sized cities, indicating that the economic development of these cities benefits from increased
                                      borrowing size. Small and medium-sized cities can promote economic development by
                                      borrowing population, economic activity density, and advanced functions contained in the
                                      national city network.

                                    Table 1. Results of regression analysis using the fixed-effects model.

                                                                 Medium and Small Cities                                                 Big City
                                          fe1                       fe2                      fe3                     fe4                       fe5
            lbpop                      0.341 ***                                                                 0.164 ***                0.255 **
                                       (0.0331)                                                                   (0.0445)                (0.1110)
            lbfun                                                47.77 ***                                       19.93 ***                 4.845
                                                                 (7.5310)                                         (6.7720)               (13.1000)
            lbden                                                                         70.50 ***              41.17 ***                 28.39
                                                                                           (8.2100)               (7.5630)               (16.7400)
            llnpop                     183.3 ***                 152.5 ***                159.3 ***              171.0 ***                43.3900
                                       (36.6000)                 (37.9700)                (38.1000)              (37.5900)               (46.7100)
           llnpop2                    −15.89 ***                −12.67 ***               −13.39 ***             −14.78 ***                −3.6400
                                        (3.0850)                  (3.2240)                 (3.2050)               (3.1840)                (3.6180)
             lfun                        0.1620                    0.0411                   0.138 *                0.0972                 1.997 **
                                        (0.0987)                  (0.0597)                 (0.0828)               (0.0853)                (0.9650)
             lden                        0.0188                    0.0230                0.0646 ***                0.0440                −3.626 *
                                        (0.0358)                  (0.0206)                 (0.0206)               (0.0315)                (1.9540)
           lpinvest                   −1.395 ***                −1.251 **                −0.962 **              −1.755 ***              −2.510 ***
                                        (0.4980)                  (0.4910)                 (0.4540)               (0.5160)                (0.8720)
            Lpfdi                     −26.50 **                 −33.65 **                −31.27 **              −28.79 **                 −6.7320
                                       (11.9300)                 (13.0900)                (12.8100)              (11.9100)                (8.5070)
            Lpedu                        3.3190                   45.1000                  35.8900                 6.2160                 26.1100
                                       (25.3000)                 (27.9300)                (26.6500)              (24.0000)               (16.5200)
            Lpgov                        0.5690                    1.4000                   1.540 *               (1.3770)                35.78 **
                                        (0.7910)                  (0.9580)                 (0.8870)               (1.2470)               (14.3300)
          Constant                    −563.2 ***                −458.3 ***               −470.9 ***             −513.3 ***                 −163.1
                                      (110.3000)                (111.2000)               (112.3000)             (112.7000)              (152.2000)
        Observations                      2286                      2286                     2286                   2286                    279
         R-squared                        0.371                     0.326                    0.363                  0.401                  0.652
       Number of city                      254                       254                      254                    254                     31
             Notes: Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses; ***, **, and * represent p < 0.01, p < 0.05, and p < 0.1, respectively.
Land 2021, 10, 134                                                                                            10 of 18




                           For large cities, only borrowing population has a significantly positive effect on
                     economic development, while the effects of borrowing economic activity density and
                     borrowing advanced functions on economic development do not pass the significance
                     test. This means that the effects of borrowing economic activity density and borrowing
                     advanced functions on urban economic development are mainly reflected in small and
                     medium-sized cities. The main reason for this is that large cities are generally regional
                     economic centers with a high degree of marketization and convenient transportation,
                     which attracts the accumulation of capital, technology, and talent. To a certain extent,
                     borrowing population can potentially provide human capital for the development of big
                     cities. However, large cities have a high level of technology and are relatively advanced in
                     terms of their service industry, which has a radiating and leading role in relation to small
                     and medium-sized cities. Generally speaking, large cities are far apart, and the surrounding
                     small and medium-sized cities are mostly focused on manufacturing industries. Therefore,
                     large cities cannot be driven by small and medium-sized cities in terms of the development
                     of technology and modern service industries.
                           Regarding control variables, for small and medium-sized cities the coefficients of the
                     primary term lnpop and the quadratic term lnpop2 of the urban population logarithm
                     are both significant at the 1% level. However, the coefficient for lnpop is positive and the
                     coefficient for lnpop2 is negative, implying that from the perspective of the national urban
                     network, there is an inverted U-shaped relationship between the local population of small
                     and medium-sized cities and the level of urban economic development. In the initial stage
                     of urban development, urban economic development benefits from the expansion of the
                     local population, but in the later stages, urban economic development will be negatively
                     affected by “big city malaise”. This conclusion is consistent with the findings of numerous
                     previous studies.

                     4.3. Spatial Heterogeneity
                           In this study, the cities included in the sample are divided into the four traditional
                     major regions (northeast, east, middle, and west) and the southern and northern regions
                     for heterogeneity testing to analyze the effects of regional differences in borrowing size on
                     the economic development of small and medium-sized cities.
                           It must be pointed out that this study mainly draws on the results of Guo Aijun
                     and Fan Qiao [66] when dividing the cities between the northern and southern regions.
                     In this study, we divided the 285 prefecture-level cities into the northern and southern
                     regions based on the geographic location of the provinces to which they belong. When
                     the latitude of a provincial capital city was below 32◦ N, we classified the prefecture-level
                     cities under the jurisdiction of its provinces as southern cities. In contrast, when the
                     latitude of a provincial capital city was above 32◦ N, we classified the prefecture-level cities
                     under the jurisdiction of its provinces as northern cities. These southern cities included
                     16 prefecture-level cities in Anhui Province, nine in Fujian Province, 21 in Guangdong
                     province, 14 in Guangxi Province, four in Guizhou Province, two in Hainan Province, 12
                     in Hubei Province, 13 in Hunan Province, 13 in Jiangsu Province, 11 in Jiangxi Province,
                     18 in Sichuan Province, eight in Yunnan Province, and 11 in Zhejiang Province, as well
                     as Shanghai City and Chongqing City. There was a total of 154 prefecture-level cities in
                     the southern region. These northern cities included 12 prefecture-level cities in Gansu
                     Province, 11 in Hebei Province, 17 in Henan Province, 12 in Heilongjiang Province, eight in
                     Jilin Province, 14 in Liaoning Province, nine in Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region, five
                     in Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region, one in Qinghai Province, 17 in Shandong Province,
                     11 in Shanxi Province, 10 in Shaanxi Province, and two in Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous
                     Region, as well as Beijing City and Tianjin City. There was a total of 131 prefecture-level
                     cities in the northern region.
                           Table 2 shows the influence of borrowing size on the level of economic development
                     of small and medium-sized cities divided into the four traditional major sectors and the
                     northern and southern regions. Overall, there are obvious differences in the impact of
Land 2021, 10, 134                                                                                                                                 11 of 18




                                      borrowing size on the economic development of cities in the various sectors. As far as the
                                      central and western regions are concerned, the coefficient for borrowing advanced functions
                                      is significantly positive at the 5% level and the coefficient for borrowing economic activity
                                      density is significantly positive at the 1% level, indicating that the economic development
                                      of small and medium-sized cities is mainly the result of borrowing advanced functions and
                                      economic activity density. This means that the small and medium-sized cities in the central
                                      and western regions are relatively weak in terms of technological innovation capabilities.
                                      Further, the level of industrial development in these areas is low, and thus the upgrading
                                      of the industrial development needs to be accelerated. Through the city network, they
                                      can be connected to large cities with high-tech, scientific research, and cultural and other
                                      advanced industries, so that these small and medium-sized cities in conjunction with large
                                      cities provide a reasonable spatial layout in terms of industrial division of labor, which can
                                      strengthen the links between industries. As the economic activity density around small
                                      and medium-sized cities has increased, these cities have strengthened the links between
                                      industries through urban networks, which has increased the spatial spillover effect in
                                      terms of knowledge, technology, and information. Therefore, an increase in borrowing
                                      advanced functions and borrowing economic activity density is conducive to the formation
                                      of a shared pattern of development among small and medium-sized cities in the central
                                      and western regions and large cities. However, in the central and western regions, the
                                      coefficient for borrowing population is not significant. This is probably because the small
                                      and medium-sized cities in the middle and western regions are inadequate in terms of
                                      agglomeration capacity and incapable of attracting people, which means that the potential
                                      market size is unable to be effectively transformed into economic benefits.

      Table 2. Urban economic development by borrowing size divided into the four traditional major plates and the southern
      and northern regions.

                                        fe_w                 fe_m                 fe_e               fe_ne                fe_n                fe_s
            Lbpop                      0.0552               0.0009             0.482 ***              0.16               0.0557            0.273 ***
                                      (0.1390)             (0.0280)             (0.0870)            (0.0957)            (0.1010)            (0.0418)
            Lbfun                     20.66 **            19.51 ***            −19.04 *                −1              29.58 ***           −9.947 ***
                                      (9.6600)             (5.9060)            (11.0900)            (4.8770)           (10.5000)            (2.8430)
            Lbden                     43.78 ***           42.33 ***               9.66             117.9 ***           50.72 ***             7.371
                                      (9.6700)             (6.0290)            (15.3900)           (25.6600)           (11.0500)            (6.1290)
      Control-variable                  YES                  YES                  YES                 YES                 YES                 YES
         Constant                    −597.1 ***           −157.5 ***          −601.1 ***          −509.5 ***          −607.7 ***           −179.3 ***
                                     (137.3000)           (43.9300)           (217.0000)          (134.7000)          (130.4000)           (64.2400)
        Observations                    657                   666                 684                 279                 1,044              1,242
         R-squared                     0.413                 0.683               0.535               0.791                0.449              0.454
       Number of city                    73                   74                   76                  31                  116                138
      Notes: Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses; ***, **, and * represent p < 0.01, p < 0.05, and p < 0.1, respectively. W, m, e, ne, n,
      and s represent the west, middle, east, northeast, north, and south, respectively.


                                           For small and medium-sized cities in the eastern region, the coefficient for borrow-
                                      ing population is significantly positive at the 1% level and the coefficient for borrowing
                                      advanced functions is negative at the 10% level, reflecting the fact that the economic de-
                                      velopment of small and medium-sized cities in the eastern region is mainly affected by
                                      borrowing population and advanced functions. This is because the eastern region has a
                                      better natural environment, relatively flat terrain, a dense transportation network, and high
                                      population density. The eastern region opened up to the world earlier and has a high degree
                                      of marketization. Further, a large number of colleges and universities are congregated in
                                      the eastern region, and thus the population has advanced conceptual and technological
                                      innovation capabilities. All of these factors have enabled the rapid transformation of this
                                      huge potential market into economic advantages, which has increased the turnover of
                                      economic resources. In addition, although China has entered a stage of slow population
                                      growth, its population remains huge, providing a steady stream of labor for the economic
Land 2021, 10, 134                                                                                            12 of 18




                     development of small and medium-sized cities in the east, thereby making the economy
                     more sustainable. However, the eastern region, as a cluster of advanced functional in-
                     dustries, faces fierce competition in terms of advanced functions. Therefore, borrowing
                     advanced functions will hinder the economic development of small and medium-sized
                     cities to a certain extent as a result of this competition. As for borrowing economic activity
                     density, the coefficient is not significant. This may be because the eastern region, as a high-
                     tech industrial cluster, is affected by the homogenization of knowledge, technology, and
                     information, making the spatial spillover effect less important for small and medium-sized
                     cities in this region.
                           For small and medium-sized cities in the northeastern region, the coefficient for bor-
                     rowing economic activity density is significant at the 1% level. Compared with the central
                     and western regions, the coefficient is much larger, indicating that borrowing economic
                     activity density plays a leading role in promoting the economic development of small
                     and medium-sized cities in the northeastern region. Generally, areas with high economic
                     activity density have frequent personnel exchanges, and technology and information can
                     be exchanged and spilled more quickly. At the same time, areas with high economic activity
                     density are also conducive to increasing industry specialization. Overall, the industrial
                     structure in northeastern China is aging, with overcapacity in traditional industries and a
                     low level of technology. This enables small and medium-sized cities with high economic
                     activity density to quickly absorb advanced technology and information through the city
                     network, increasing their ability to transform economic activity into economic benefits.
                     What is more, the coefficient for the borrowing population is not significant, which may be
                     because of the development environment in the northeast region. While China is in the
                     process of adjusting its economic growth rates and industrial structure, the northeastern
                     region, which is an important industrial base, is dominated by heavy industry, and the
                     development of its light industry, private enterprises, and modern service industries is lag-
                     ging. With the decline of heavy industry and the depletion of resources in the northeastern
                     region, the attractiveness of this region to the population has been weakened, leading to
                     significant urban contraction. Borrowing population to transform into an effective source of
                     new product markets and human resources is difficult. Further, the coefficient for borrow-
                     ing advanced functions is not significant. This may be because the traditional industries
                     in the northeastern region, such as steel, coal, and building materials, are facing greater
                     pressure in terms of overcapacity as a result of profound changes in market demand [67]. It
                     is difficult for these industries to form effective industrial connections with other industries
                     with advanced functions.
                           From the perspective of the northern and southern regions, the effect of borrowing
                     size on the economic development of small and medium-sized cities differs. For small
                     and medium-sized cities in the northern region, the coefficients for borrowing advanced
                     functions and borrowing economic activity density are both significantly positive at the
                     1% level, while the coefficient for borrowing population is not significant. However,
                     for small and medium-sized cities in the southern region, the coefficients for borrowing
                     population and borrowing advanced functions are both significant at the 1% level. However,
                     the coefficient for borrowing population is positive, while that for borrowing advanced
                     functions is negative. In addition, the coefficient for borrowing economic activity density
                     is not significant. The north–south differences in the impact of the three dimensions of
                     borrowing size on the economic development of small and medium-sized cities reflect
                     the differences in the economic development of northern and southern cities. Over the
                     past 40 years since the reform and opening up, China has gradually been integrated
                     into the Asia-Pacific marine economy. Southern cities, especially southeastern coastal
                     cities, have developed rapidly, and the market system has been well cultivated. The
                     collective changes in population, wealth, knowledge, skills, and consumption have been
                     described as a “peacock flying southeast”. The comprehensive strength of southern cities,
                     with their excellent development opportunities and living environment, is constantly
                     increasing. The improvement of technological innovation capabilities in southern cities has
Land 2021, 10, 134                                                                                          13 of 18




                     promoted industrial transformation and upgrading, and improved quality and efficiency.
                     Borrowing population provides southern cities with vast consumer markets and reserves
                     of human capital. However, borrowing advanced functions has also generated fierce
                     competition with foreign countries, causing some unnecessary losses, which to a certain
                     extent has hindered the improvement of local productivity. In contrast, the economy of
                     the northern region is dominated by resources, energy, and heavy industry, and thus the
                     task of eliminating excess capacity is greater. Investment in research and development is
                     relatively inadequate, the concept of development is backward, and economic development
                     is relatively slow. Therefore, borrowing economic activity density is conducive to small
                     and medium-sized cities absorbing advanced concepts, technologies, and information
                     through urban networks. To a certain extent, borrowing advanced functions can avoid
                     competition among homogeneous advanced functional industries, and thus enable small
                     and medium-sized cities to achieve coordinated development through the spatial division
                     of industries.

                     5. Conclusions and Policy Recommendations
                     5.1. Conclusions
                           On the basis of the results of previous studies, we constructed a city network composed
                     of 285 prefecture-level cities in China and measured the three dimensions of borrowing
                     size. Then, we analyzed changes in the spatiotemporal distribution of the three dimensions
                     of borrowing size in 2004, 2009, and 2013. Using socioeconomic data and nighttime lighting
                     data for China’s prefecture-level cities from 2004 to 2013, we empirically tested several
                     hypotheses using a fixed-effects model and panel data, and also compared the heterogeneity
                     of the northeastern, eastern, central, western, southern, and northern regions to analyze
                     the different regional effects of borrowing size on the economic development of small and
                     medium-sized cities. The results enabled us to draw the following conclusions.
                           First, regarding the spatiotemporal distribution of borrowing size, areas with a higher
                     level of borrowing population are more concentrated in space, and mainly located in the
                     North China Plain and the Middle and Lower Yangtze Plain. In contrast, areas with a
                     lower level of borrowing population are mainly located in the northwestern frontier region.
                     Borrowing population has only slightly increased over time, with the overall situation
                     remaining stable. The number of prefecture-level cities that borrowed advanced functions
                     decreased, then increased, and then decreased again. Borrowing economic activity density
                     is highly dependent on location-related factors. Areas with higher economic activity density
                     are mostly located in the center of the study area, while those with lower economic activity
                     density are mostly located at the edge of the study area. The number of prefecture-level
                     cities with higher levels of borrowing economic activity density has gradually increased
                     over time.
                           Second, the overall impact of borrowing population, borrowing advanced functions,
                     and borrowing economic activity density on the economic development of small and
                     medium-sized cities is significantly positive, indicating that borrowing size plays a positive
                     role in the economic development of these cities. In contrast, the effect of borrowing size
                     on large cities is mainly reflected in borrowing population, while borrowing advanced
                     functions and borrowing economic activity density do not have significant effects on the
                     economic development of large cities. The research provides support for the positive
                     impact of borrowing population on the economic development of small and medium-sized
                     cities in Hypothesis 1, but it does not prove that the effect between them is relatively
                     insignificant. Hypothesis 2 proposes that the increase of borrowing economic activity
                     density can promote the economic development of small and medium-sized cities, and it is
                     confirmed in this article. Hypothesis 3 proposes that borrowing advanced functions has
                     a dual effect on the promotion of the economic development of small and medium-sized
                     cities. The research in this paper provides support for the positive effect, but it does not
                     confirm the negative relationship between them.
Land 2021, 10, 134                                                                                             14 of 18




                          Third, the influence of borrowing size on the economic development of small and
                     medium-sized cities varies significantly by region. From the perspective of the four tradi-
                     tional major plates, for small and medium-sized cities in the central and western regions,
                     the most positive influences are borrowing advanced functions and borrowing economic
                     activity density, while borrowing population does not play a significant role. For small
                     and medium-sized cities in the eastern region, the most positive influence is borrowing
                     population, while borrowing advanced functions plays a negative role and the impact of
                     borrowing economic activity density is not significant. For small and medium-sized cities
                     in the eastern and northern regions, the most positive influence is borrowing economic
                     activity density, while the impact of borrowing population and borrowing advanced func-
                     tions is not significant. From the perspective of south–north differences, for small and
                     medium-sized cities in the north, borrowing advanced functions and borrowing economic
                     activity density have had a significantly positive impact on productivity, while borrowing
                     population has not. However, for small and medium-sized cities in the south, the impact
                     of borrowing population and borrowing advanced functions is highly significant, although
                     borrowing population has had a positive effect, while borrowing advanced functions has
                     had a negative effect. The effect of borrowing economic activity density is not significant.

                     5.2. Policy Suggestions
                           Based on the findings of our study, the following policy suggestions are proposed.
                           First, the government should continue to upgrade the road network to improve the
                     level of accessibility among cities. The improvement of the urban network will enable
                     borrowing size to play a positive role in urban economic development [68]. The increasingly
                     close connections between cities has seen the level of inter-city accessibility improve,
                     which enables small and medium-sized cities to exploit their comparative advantages.
                     In a strong city network, these cities avoid the disadvantages of their relatively small
                     scale by borrowing size to obtain the product markets and factor markets needed for
                     development, and strengthen the level of exchange and cooperation with each node city in
                     the city network. This not only enables the free flow of traditional elements such as raw
                     materials, capital, and labor, but also promotes the exchange of knowledge, technology,
                     and information, thereby improving the quality and efficiency of industrial development.
                           The distribution of urban industries should be designed to promote urban economic
                     development. Borrowing size can play a positive role in urban economic development
                     through benign interactions among industries in various cities. At present, it is difficult
                     for cities to individually adapt to the development of the global economy. Thus, the
                     development of urban groups should be seen as the future direction for the development of
                     cities. Each city should clarify its position based on its relative strengths. For central cities,
                     it is necessary to enhance high-end service functions, overcome difficulties in mastering
                     core technologies, and establish an industrial structure dominated by modern service
                     industries. For small and medium-sized cities, it is necessary to make full use of the
                     advantages presented by low factor costs such as those related to land and labor, and to
                     excel in attracting related industries by optimizing the business environment. Small and
                     medium-sized cities should also cultivate traditional industries suited to local conditions
                     and continue to consolidate the manufacturing base. Cities with an inefficient industrial
                     layout and a lack of suitable industries should make use of urban networks to obtain access
                     to complementary urban functions and coordinated industrial development.
                           Third, governments should actively cultivate and introduce talent to support the
                     development of cities. Talent is a key factor enabling borrowing size to play a positive
                     role in urban economic development. Talent also plays a key supporting role in relation
                     to regional development and industrial development as an intermediary enabling small
                     and medium-sized cities to borrow size. Generally, talented workers are, to a large extent,
                     the carriers of knowledge and technology to a city. Through the city network, talent can
                     take advantage of intercity exchanges to quickly access market information and advanced
                     technologies. Through industrial cooperation, human resources can promote the inflow of
Land 2021, 10, 134                                                                                                 15 of 18




                     capital, which can be invested in the production of marketable products, and thus help to
                     transform the potential market in these cities into consumer markets, thereby promoting the
                     development of these cities. Therefore, small and medium-sized cities should implement
                     flexible programs aimed at introducing high-level talent. These programs should take
                     various forms such as consultant guidance, project cooperation, retirement reemployment,
                     and talent leasing based on the requirements of local industries. They should also focus
                     on attracting college graduates, making full use of the opportunities presented by campus
                     recruitment programs, and undertake talent introduction activities. In addition, it is
                     important to make suitable arrangements for the accommodation of the introduced talent
                     to ensure that they can operate at their full capacity to promote the development of
                     these cities.
                           Based on the multiple dimensions of borrowing size, this paper explores the impact of
                     borrowing size on the economic development of small and medium-sized cities in China
                     from the theoretical and empirical aspects. The fixed effects model of panel data is used to
                     empirically test the impact of borrowing size on the economic development of small and
                     medium-sized cities, enriching the quantitative empirical research on related issues. At the
                     same time, it also provides a reference for the research of other developing countries and
                     enriches the theory related to the impact of borrowing size on the development of small
                     and medium-sized cities.
                           However, due to the availability of data and the limited level of this research, this
                     paper still has some shortcomings: (1) In the theoretical discussion part, this article has
                     not yet established the corresponding mathematical model from the classical theories,
                     but only conducted some qualitative analysis at the theoretical level. (2) In terms of
                     research perspectives, the effect of borrowing size is essentially dependent on microscopic
                     subjects such as individuals and enterprises. However, the research in this article is not
                     at such a micro level. (3) In terms of research scale, the major coverage of this research
                     prefecture-level cities. Instead of using population as classification standard, this article
                     simply classifies prefecture-level cities other than provincial capitals, municipalities, and
                     the Shenzhen City as small and medium-sized cities. Besides, most of the small and
                     medium-sized cities, especially small cities, exist in the form of county-level cities, and this
                     article has not yet detailed the research to county-level cities. (4) In terms of the distance
                     weight setting of the city network, the data used in this article are mainly the shortest road
                     mileage available in September 2019, failing to reflect the development of the city network
                     connection, such as the upgrade of urban roads, the process of urban road networks to be
                     densified, and the addition of airlines and railways. Besides, the research does not include
                     the construction and connection of inter-city communication networks.
                           In order to provide a more comprehensive view, future research can be conducted
                     from the following aspects: (1) In terms of theoretical analysis, the modeling methods of
                     classic theories can be used to construct a mathematical model of the influence of borrowing
                     size on the economic development of small and medium-sized cities, making the argument
                     more rigorous and powerful. (2) In terms of research perspectives, research and elaboration
                     are suggested to be carried out from the perspective of individuals and enterprises. (3) In
                     terms of research scale, collecting county-level data can make the research more refined.
                     (4) In terms of setting the distance weight of the city network, it is necessary to collect
                     more information about the construction of the transportation network between cities,
                     and incorporate the connection of the information network between cities to construct a
                     comprehensive and dynamic distance weight table, so as to reflect the situation of city
                     network connection more accurately.

                     Author Contributions: Conceptualization, X.G. and F.Z.; Methodology, F.Z.; Writing—Original Draft
                     Preparation, X.G. and F.Z.; Writing—Review and Editing, F.Z. All authors have read and agreed to
                     the published version of the manuscript.
                     Funding: This research was supported by the Social Science Foundation of China (grant number 20XJL008).
Land 2021, 10, 134                                                                                                               16 of 18




                                  Data Availability Statement: The publicly available sources for the data used in this study have
                                  been described in the article; for other data, please contact the corresponding author based on
                                  reasonable grounds.
                                  Acknowledgments: Xiaojiang Ding and Peixian Liu, master students of the School of Economics,
                                  Lanzhou University, are gratefully acknowledged for their assistance in the compilation and calcula-
                                  tion of the original data, and in the writing of the manuscript.
                                  Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Burger, M.J.; Meijers, E.J. Agglomerations and the rise of urban network externalities. Pap. Reg. Sci. 2016, 95, 5–15. [CrossRef]
2.    Zhao, F.; Yuan, C. The development of Urbanization in China: A study Based on Spatial Equilibrium Model. Economics (Quarterly)
      2017, 16, 1643–1668. [CrossRef]
3.    Liu, X.; Li, S.; Qin, M. Urban Spatial Structure and Regional Economic Efficiency: Concurrently Discuss the Pattern Choice of
      China’s Urbanization Development. Manag. World 2017, 51–64. [CrossRef]
4.    Wang, Z.Y.; Zhang, X.L. The Path Selection for High Quality Development of China’s Small Towns in Post-industrialization
      Period. Chin. Ind. Econ. 2019, 62–80. [CrossRef]
5.    Yao, C.; Song, D. Borrowed-size, network externalities and agglomeration economics in the urban agglomerations. Ind. Econ. Res.
      2019, 2, 76–87. [CrossRef]
6.    Zhang, R. Urban Agglomeration Spatial Network Structure Spatial-Temporal Evolution in the Yangtze River Delta. Econ. Geogr.
      2017, 37, 46–52. [CrossRef]
7.    Chen, Y.; Sun, B. Does Agglomeration Shadow Exist in Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei Region?—Large Cities’ Impact on Regional Economic
      Growth. Geogr. Res. 2017, 36, 1936–1946. [CrossRef]
8.    Combes, P.-P.; Duranton, G.; Gobillon, L.; Roux, S. Estimating Agglomeration Economies with History, Geology, and Worker
      Effects. Agglom. Econ. 2013, 2010, 15–66. [CrossRef]
9.    Fan, J. Industrial Agglomeration and Difference of Regional Labor Productivity: Chinese Evidence with International Comparison.
      Econ. Res. 2006, 11, 72–81.
10.   Wang, X. Urbanization Path and City Scale in China: An Economic Analysis. Econ. Res. 2010, 45, 20–32.
11.   Glaeser, E.L.; Ponzetto, G.A.M.; Zou, Y. Urban networks: Connecting markets, people, and ideas. Pap. Reg. Sci. 2016, 95, 17–59.
      [CrossRef]
12.   Ke, S.; Zhao, Y. Industrial Structure, City Size and Urban Productivity in China. Econ. Res. 2014, 49, 76–88.
13.   Lu, M.; Gao, H.; Hiroshi, S. On Urban size and Inclusive Employment. Chin. Soc. Sci. 2012, 10, 47–66.
14.   Meijers, E.J.; Burger, M.J. Spatial Structure and Productivity in US Metropolitan Areas. Environ. Plan. A Econ. Space 2010, 42,
      1383–1402. [CrossRef]
15.   Zhao, Y. How Does the Distribution of Small and Medium Size Cities Affect Labors’ Wage? Quant. Econ. Technol. Res. 2013, 30,
      39–55. [CrossRef]
16.   Ciccone, A.; Hall, R.E. Productivity and the Density of Economic Activity. Am. Econ. Rev. 1996, 86, 54–70. [CrossRef]
17.   Martinus, K.; Suzuki, J.; Bossaghzadeh, S. Agglomeration economies, interregional commuting and innovation in the peripheries.
      Reg. Stud. 2020, 54, 776–788. [CrossRef]
18.   Henderson, V.; Becker, R.A. Political Economy of City Sizes and Formation. J. Urban Econ. 2000, 48, 453–484. [CrossRef]
19.   Sun, J. The Significance, Value and Planning Idea of the Xiongan New Area. Econ. Dyn. 2017, 7, 6–8.
20.   Richardson, H.W. The costs of urbanization: A four-country comparison. Econ. Dev. Cult. Chang. 1987, 35, 561–580. [CrossRef]
21.   Guan, X.; Wei, H.; Lu, S.; Deng, Y. Patterns and Driving Mechanism of Spatial Agglomeration During the Urbanization Process in
      China. Geogr. Res. 2016, 35, 227–241. [CrossRef]
22.   Wei, H. Polarization Trend and Optimization of Size Distribution in China’s Urbanization Process. Chin. Ind. Econ. 2014, 3, 18–30.
      [CrossRef]
23.   An, S.; Sun, W. Functions of Small-medium Cities in Metropolitan Areas and Their Promotion Strategies. Reform 2019, 5, 48–59.
24.   Wang, X.; Xia, X. Optimizing the Size of Cities to Promote Economic Growth. Econ. Res. 1999, 9, 22–29.
25.   Au, C.; Henderson, J.V. Are Chinese Cities Too Small? Rev. Econ. Stud. 2006, 73, 549–576. [CrossRef]
26.   Camagni, R.; Capello, R.; Caragliu, A. Static vs. Dynamic Agglomeration Economies: Spatial Context and Structural Evolution
      behind Urban Growth. Semin. Stud. Reg. Urban Econ. 2017, 95, 227–259. [CrossRef]
27.   Johansson, B.; Quigley, J.M. Agglomeration and Networks in Spatial Economies; Springer Nature: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2004;
      Volume 2004, pp. 165–176.
28.   Fang, C.; Wang, Z.; Ma, H. The Theoretical Cognition and Geographical Academic Contribution of the Development Law of
      China’s Urban Agglomeration. Acta Geogr. Sin. 2018, 73, 651–665. [CrossRef]
29.   Parnreiter, C. More than an Ordinary City: The Role of Mexico City in Global Commodity Chains; Edward Elgar Publishing: Cheltenham,
      UK, 2013.
30.   De Vos, D.; Lindgren, U.; Van Ham, M.; Meijers, E.J. Does broadband internet allow cities to ‘borrow size’? Evidence from the
      Swedish labour market. Reg. Stud. 2020, 54, 1175–1186. [CrossRef]
Land 2021, 10, 134                                                                                                            17 of 18




31.   Klaasen, I.; Rooij, R.; Van Schaick, J. Network Cities: Operationalising a Strong but Confusing Concept. In Proceedings of the
      Sustainable Urban Areas International Conference, Rotterdam, The Netherland, 25–28 June 2007.
32.   De Goei, B.; Burger, M.J.; Van Oort, F.G.; Kitson, M. Functional Polycentrism and Urban Network Development in the Greater
      South East, United Kingdom: Evidence from Commuting Patterns, 1981–2001. Reg. Stud. 2009, 44, 1149–1170. [CrossRef]
33.   Katz, M.L.; Shapiro, C. Network Externalities, Competition, and Compatibility. Am. Econ. Rev. 1985, 75, 424–440.
34.   McCann, P.; Acs, Z.J. Globalization: Countries, Cities and Multinationals. Reg. Stud. 2010, 45, 17–32. [CrossRef]
35.   Bel, G.; Fageda, X. Getting There Fast: Globalization, Intercontinental Flights and Location of Headquarters. SSRN Electron. J.
      2005, 8, 471–495. [CrossRef]
36.   Ni, P.; Kresl, P. The Global Urban Competitiveness Report—2010; Edward Elgar Publishing: Cheltenham, UK, 2010.
37.   Capello, R. The City Network Paradigm: Measuring Urban Network Externalities. Urban Stud. 2000, 37, 1925–1945. [CrossRef]
38.   Meijers, E.J.; Burger, M.J. Stretching the concept of ‘borrowed size’. Urban Stud. 2017, 54, 269–291. [CrossRef]
39.   Alonso, W. Urban zero population growth. Daedalus 1973, 102, 191–206.
40.   Phelps, N.A.; Fallon, R.J.; Williams, C.L. Small Firms, Borrowed Size and the Urban-Rural Shift. Reg. Stud. 2001, 35, 613–624.
      [CrossRef]
41.   Parr, J.B. Agglomeration Economies: Ambiguities and Confusions. Environ. Plan. A Econ. Space 2002, 34, 717–731. [CrossRef]
42.   Liu, X.; Chen, Z. Borrowed Size and Borrowed Functions in Urban System: Empirical Research on Agglomeration Economy from
      the View of Externalities of Networks. Urban Probl. 2017, 12, 12–19. [CrossRef]
43.   Hepworth, M. Telecommunications and the future of London. Policy Stud. 1992, 13, 31–45. [CrossRef]
44.   Phelps, N.A. On the edge of something big: Edge-city economic development in Croydon, South London. Town Plan. Rev. 1998,
      69, 441. [CrossRef]
45.   Hesse, M. On borrowed size, flawed urbanisation and emerging enclave spaces: The exceptional urbanism of Luxembourg,
      Luxembourg. Eur. Urban Reg. Stud. 2016, 23, 612–627. [CrossRef]
46.   Zhu, L. Borrowed Size and the Development of Small Firms in Non-metro Areas. Econ. Geogr. 2009, 29, 420–424.
47.   Burger, M.J.; Meijers, E.J.; Hoogerbrugge, M.M.; Tresserra, J.M. Borrowed Size, Agglomeration Shadows and Cultural Amenities
      in North-West Europe. Eur. Plan. Stud. 2015, 23, 1090–1109. [CrossRef]
48.   Malý, J. Small Towns in the Context of “Borrowed Size” and “Agglomeration Shadow” Debates: The Case of the South Moravian
      Region (Czech Republic). Eur. Countrys. 2016, 8, 333–350. [CrossRef]
49.   Meijers, E.J.; Burger, M.J.; Hoogerbrugge, M.M. Borrowing size in networks of cities: City size, network connectivity and
      metropolitan functions in Europe. Pap. Reg. Sci. 2016, 95, 181–198. [CrossRef]
50.   Rauch, J. Geography and trade. J. Int. Econ. 1993, 34, 195–198. [CrossRef]
51.   Camagni, R.; Capello, R.; Caragliu, A. The Rise of Second-Rank Cities: What Role for Agglomeration Economies? Eur. Plan. Stud.
      2014, 23, 1069–1089. [CrossRef]
52.   Dijkstra, L.; Garcilazo, E.; McCann, P. The Economic Performance of European Cities and City Regions: Myths and Realities. Eur.
      Plan. Stud. 2013, 21, 334–354. [CrossRef]
53.   Sun, B.; Ding, S. Do large Cities Contribute to the Economic Growth of Small Cities?—Evidence from Yangtze River Delta in
      China. Geogr. Res. 2016, 35, 1615–1625. [CrossRef]
54.   Li, G. Theoretical Summaries on Micro Bases of Urban Cluster Economy. Urban Probl. 2008, 5, 46–52.
55.   Partridge, M.D.; Rickman, D.S.; Ali, K.; Olfert, M.R. Do New Economic Geography agglomeration shadows underlie current
      population dynamics across the urban hierarchy? Pap. Reg. Sci. 2009, 88, 445–466. [CrossRef]
56.   Meili, R.; Mayer, H. Small and medium-sized towns in Switzerland: Economic heterogeneity, socioeconomic performance and
      linkages. Erdkunde 2017, 71, 313–332. [CrossRef]
57.   Crozet, M. Do migrants follow market potentials? An estimation of a new economic geography model. J. Econ. Geogr. 2004, 4,
      439–458. [CrossRef]
58.   Row, A.T.; Jacobs, J. The Death and Life of Great American Cities. Yale Law J. 1962, 71, 1597. [CrossRef]
59.   Boix, R.; Trullén, J. Knowledge, networks of cities and growth in regional urban systems. Pap. Reg. Sci. 2007, 86, 551–574.
      [CrossRef]
60.   Levinson, D.M. Network Structure and City Size. PLoS ONE 2012, 7, e29721. [CrossRef]
61.   Otsuka, A. Inter-regional networks and productive efficiency in Japan. Pap. Reg. Sci. 2019, 99, 115–133. [CrossRef]
62.   Luo, X.; Hu, L.; Wan, C. Structural Convergence and the Innovation Incentive Effect of the Advantageous Enterprise Support
      Policy. Manag. World 2018, 34, 181–183.
63.   Xu, K.; Chen, F.; Liu, X. The Truth of China Economic Growth: Research on the Global Night-time Light Data. Econ. Res. 2015, 50,
      17–29.
64.   Zhang, Y.; Pan, J. Spatiotemporal Simulation and Differentiation Pattern of China’s Carbon Emissions Based on DMSP/OLS Data.
      China Environ. Sci. 2019, 39, 1436–1446. [CrossRef]
65.   Cai, F. The Impact of the Financial crisis on the Manufacturing Industry: An Opportunity for the Central and Western Regions to
      Catch Up. Econ. Dyn. 2009, 2, 4–8.
66.   Guo, A.; Fan, Q. North-South Coordinated Development of National New Zones from Perspective of Economic Harmony.
      Guizhou Soc. Sci. 2019, 2, 117–127.
Land 2021, 10, 134                                                                                                          18 of 18




67.   Lin, X.; Yang, J.; Zhang, X.; Chao, H. Analysis on Shrinking Cities and Influential Factors in China: From the Perspective of
      Population and Economy. Hum. Geogr. 2017, 32, 82–89.
68.   Cheng, Y.; Chen, L. Deconstruction of City Competitiveness from the Perspective of City Network. Economist 2012, 8, 72–79.
