[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: book/A23-meijers-cardoso-2021-shedding-light-or-casting-shadows-relations-between-primary-and-secondary-cities-10.1332-policypress-9781529212075.003.0002.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Author:          pendras
Creator:         Microsoft® Word for Microsoft 365
Producer:        Microsoft® Word for Microsoft 365
CreationDate:    Thu May 12 14:53:34 2022 WIB
ModDate:         Thu May 12 14:53:34 2022 WIB
Custom Metadata: no
Metadata Stream: yes
Tagged:          yes
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            none
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           35
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       612 x 792 pts (letter)
Page rot:        0
File size:       1028869 bytes
Optimized:       no
PDF version:     1.7
[Extracted Text]
  Shedding Light or Casting Shadows? Relations between Primary and Secondary Cities

    Evert Meijers (Utrecht University) & Rodrigo Cardoso (Delft University of Technology)




                      This chapter appeared as chapter 2 in this book:
    M. Pendras, & C. Williams (Eds.), Secondary Cities: Exploring Uneven Development in
      Dynamic Urban Regions of the Global North (pp. 25-54). Bristol University Press.

                                       Please cite as:
  Meijers, E. J., & Ordonhas Viseu Cardoso, R. (2021). Shedding Light or Casting Shadows?
    Relations between Primary and Secondary Cities. In M. Pendras, & C. Williams (Eds.),
  Secondary Cities: Exploring Uneven Development in Dynamic Urban Regions of the Global
                         North (pp. 25-54). Bristol University Press.




Introduction

Until recently, it was rather common to perceive the hinterland of cities as ‘rural’, directing

research to the study of linkages, relations and dependencies between ‘urban’ and ‘rural’ (for

example, see Hoggart, 2005). This widespread traditional conception of cities having a

predominantly rural hinterland needs to be challenged, as processes of spatial upscaling and

expansion have made many cities find other cities in their hinterland, suggesting that a focus on

regional urban–urban relations is just as valid as a focus on urban–rural relations. Put simply: many

functional urban areas or metropolitan areas – terms traditionally used to denote a city and its

surrounding commuting area – are nowadays composed of multiple cities. It makes sense to

address these regions as multicentric urban areas or as ‘polycentric urban regions’ when these

cities do not differ widely in terms of size or overall importance.

       Champion (2001) has distinguished three modes through which such multicentric urban

regions arise. First, he distinguished a ‘centrifugal mode’: some smaller cities in the sphere of
influence of larger cities may have risen as satellite towns of the latter, as a result of core city

expansion and redistribution. Second, an ‘incorporation mode’ is discerned when a larger city

extends its sphere of influence to include a formerly rather self-sustaining surrounding town or

small city, or a set of several such cities. Third, the ‘fusion mode’ denotes that previously distinct

and independent cities of rather similar size become integrated due to the advancement of

connective infrastructure and technology, and the spatial extension of activity and travel patterns

of people and firms.

       Basing our research on European Spatial Planning Observation Network (ESPON) data

(projects 1.1.1 and 1.4.3 in particular; see ESPON, 2005, 2011), we can calculate that 1,001 out

of the 1,967 European cities are actually located in a multicentric metropolitan area (meaning that

they are located in the sphere of influence of another city and vice versa), whereas the others are

the sole centre of their functional region. In terms of population, the share is even larger: out of

the 265 million inhabitants of these 1,967 cities, almost 192 million people (72.4 per cent) live in

a multicentric urban region, while only 73 million people live in cities that do not have other cities

in their hinterland. Hence, in sharp contrast to popular conceptions, multicentric urban regions are

the dominant mode of urbanization in Europe, not the single city with its more or less suburban

commuting area or rural hinterland. This poses an interesting challenge for researchers and policy-

makers alike, because many of our urban theories still depart from this outdated notion of city plus

hinterland. In policy practice, the complexity of governing multicentric urban regions, with their

overlapping boundaries and powers but shared challenges and priorities, needs little emphasis.

       With the rise of multicentric urban regions, we also require a framework to capture and

describe the unfolding spatial organization of the process of metropolitan integration that they are

experiencing. As is widely known in economic theory and in transport geography, increased
integration leads to a rearrangement of economic activities, people and urban functions over space,

creating new interactions and interdependencies between the cities making up multicentric urban

regions. It is also known that even though there are socio-economic benefits arising from

integration (the generative effect), these benefits and the costs of integration do not necessarily

spread evenly over a region (a redistributive effect), even when a strong governance framework is

put in place (Lefèvre, 1998; Hincks et al, 2017).

       Recently, a novel framework for capturing the spatial organization of multicentric urban

regions was developed, building on the concepts of ‘borrowed size’ and ‘agglomeration shadows’

(Meijers and Burger, 2017). It is assumed that stronger integration with other cities allows a city

to ‘borrow size’: to tap into the agglomeration benefits of nearby cities if they are sufficiently

integrated. This could become visible in higher growth rates, or in having more, or more

specialized, functions than one would expect given the size of those places. But at the same time,

a process of metropolitan integration may lead to cities being in an ‘agglomeration shadow’ when

the presence of certain economic activities or urban functions in nearby places means that there is

no room to develop these themselves, or when the process of integration empties out these places

of higher-order activities and functions since they can be served from other cities. So far, it has

remained unclear why one city profits from metropolitan integration in the sense of borrowing

size, whereas another may face the agglomeration shadows of nearby cities.

       In this chapter we explore and empirically substantiate this framework of borrowed

size/agglomeration shadows by positioning cities in a classic multicentric urban region, the

Randstad Holland, in the framework developed by Meijers and Burger, and explore which factors

are associated with a position in the ‘agglomeration shadow’ or the ‘borrowing size’ quadrants. It

is not our intention to establish causality at this early stage of exploration, which would also allow
robust policy recommendations, but rather to seek general characteristics that typify primary and

secondary cities, and hence, what differentiates them, and the challenges they face. These different

points of departure are important to avoid ‘one-size-fits-all’ urban development strategies, not just

with respect to the differences between primary and secondary cities, but also taking the

heterogeneity among secondary cities into account. In the process, we will also test the borrowed

size/agglomeration shadow framework and ultimately develop it further.

        The theory section goes deeper into the process of increased integration between cities and

its associated benefits and costs – so-called ‘network externalities’. Subsequently, we expand the

current ‘borrowed size/agglomeration shadow’ framework and present an empirical exercise that

leads to the classification of places in the Randstad into this framework. This classification is then

associated with six factors, whose relevance we explain later in this chapter: historical importance,

size, sectoral composition of the local economy, social status, network embeddedness and tourism.

Finally, the conclusion synthesizes our findings and sketches a research agenda that emerges from

these results.



Theory

The basic idea that further integration between cities yields important benefits is widespread. It

would lead to what Capello (2000) has termed ‘urban network externalities’. This concept refers

to the benefits originating from relationships between places (see also Camagni, 1993; Meijers,

2005; Boix and Trullén, 2007; Van Oort et al, 2010; Burger and Meijers, 2016) and can be

described as external economies from which firms and households can benefit by being located in

agglomerations that are well embedded or positioned in networks that connect with other

agglomerations.
       While an emerging scholarship on the benefits of such networks between cities is

developing, the simple importance of relationships between cities has been stressed many times in

historical accounts of the evolution of the European urban system (for example, De Vries, 1984;

Hohenberg and Lees, 1995). The idea that ‘the spatial organisation in which cities operate is

fundamental to understanding their efficiency, growth, factor productivity and sometimes their

specialisation’ (Capello and Camagni, 2000: 1484) is also at the heart of the urban systems

literature that had its heyday in the 1960s, 1970s and early 1980s (Pred, 1977; Bourne and

Simmons, 1978).

       Currently, we are witnessing a revival of such scholarship as there are five different schools

studying relationships between cities (Peris et al, 2018): one predominantly focusing on the

regional or intra-metropolitan scale and centred on concepts of polycentricity (for example,

Kloosterman and Musterd, 2001; Parr, 2004); one addressing the global scale with a focus on

world city firm and communication networks (see Alderson and Beckfield, 2004; Taylor and

Derudder, 2016); one somewhat diffuse school rooted in urban economics (‘the new economic

geography’) employing economic modelling approaches (for example, Fujita et al, 1999; Partridge

et al, 2008); one school employing simulation and complexity theories to understand the behaviour

of individual and institutional agents building the urban system from the bottom up, often drawing

inspiration from physics (see Batty et al, 1999; Bretagnolle and Pumain, 2010); and, finally, one

seeking regularities (‘laws’) with respect to city size distributions within an urban system (see

Gabaix and Ioannides, 2004; Bettencourt et al, 2007). Despite their many ontological and

epistemological differences, these approaches share a focus on functional and economic types of

relationships and networks between cities.
       Despite this attention, it is hard to quantify or precisely define the importance of network

embeddedness for individual cities. While studies repeatedly show the importance of a city’s

embeddedness in large-scale networks of all kinds – firms, capital, knowledge, people, goods – for

its performance (Taylor, 2003; Bel and Fageda, 2008; Neal, 2013; Meijers et al, 2016), how such

networks’ importance compares to local factors is largely unknown. Some time ago, scholars

argued that local factors still seem to substantially outweigh network effects (Boix and Trullen,

2007), but it appears that the importance of network externalities is growing as the connectivity of

places has been rapidly increasing in the past decades. McCann and Acs (2011) argue that

nowadays national and international connectivity is more important for performance than size.

This was empirically substantiated by Meijers et al (2016), who found that the presence of

particular metropolitan functions was better explained by connectivity than by local size – for

example, international organizations, headquarters, advanced producer services, banks, fairs,

conferences, patents. It would seem that networks substitute for proximity (Johansson and Quigley,

2004), but this could also be a more complementary relationship – particular local conditions may,

for instance, also foster a good network embeddedness. The nature of the interaction between local

factors and network factors is unknown, and in this light, this chapter associates local factors with

network relatedness and ultimately with the outcome of network integration.

       Some studies have shown the presence of such network externalities in the particular

context of multicentric urban regions (see Maly, 2016). It was found, for instance, that the more

closely cities were integrated, the more network externalities were present, while the lack of

integration between nearby cities would even lead to negative urban network externalities (Meijers

and Burger, 2017). Recently, it was shown that higher levels of functional integration and

institutional integration (metropolitan cooperation) contribute to the presence of more
agglomeration benefits at the scale of a network of cities within a single urban region (Meijers et

al, 2018).

          However, while positive urban network externalities arise at the level of urban regions as

a whole (or, perhaps better put, at the level of the network of cities), it remains a question whether

individual cities profit from metropolitan integration by definition. It could well be that a

generative effect at the level of urban regions hides an intra-regional distributive effect. Such

effects have been established in transportation studies and in economic theory, most notably the

New Economic Geography. In transportation studies this has been referred to as ‘the two-way road

argument’ (Preston, 2001: 18), meaning that new infrastructure (that is, stronger integration)

between a core and peripheral region can promote outward investment just as easily as inward

investment. The core–periphery models of the New Economic Geography suggest that integration

expands market areas, but also leads to more competition between firms in the periphery and in

the core city. The latter are often producing more advanced products, while the former are losing

their local monopoly. The outcome of integration depends on the balance between centripetal and

centrifugal forces (Krugman, 1991; Fujita et al, 1999), and transportation costs are a central

element in determining this balance. Low costs make it possible to serve the region from one place,

so it then makes sense to profit from agglomeration economies in the largest place. The presence

of such distributive effects of new infrastructure has been shown by, for instance, Meijers et al

(2012).

          Local politicians and policy-makers often pay lip service to the potential generative effects

of city network integration, but are probably most interested in the distributive effects. The simple

fact that the number of functions and activities in any multicentric urban region is not infinite, and

that their distribution basically is a zero-sum game, means that cities compete heavily with other
cities in their multicentric region, certainly if their tax revenues are mostly comprised of local

taxes.

         Recently, a conceptual framework was introduced that captures the possible outcomes of

further integration in multicentric urban regions (Meijers and Burger, 2017). It builds on two

concepts: ‘borrowed size’ (Alonso, 1973) and ‘agglomeration shadows’ (appropriated from the

New Economic Geography literature, for example Krugman, 1993). Size borrowing occurs when

a city exhibits urban functions and/or performance levels normally associated with larger cities

that enjoy corresponding agglomeration externalities, and this pattern is a consequence of being

integrated with those cities. Agglomeration shadows are essentially the opposite effect, yet are also

the product of integration with nearby or more distant cities. It could be said that a place is under

an agglomeration shadow when it has fewer functions and lower performance levels than expected

given its size, because of competition effects from cities with which it is integrated through

networks and relations. Volgmann and Rusche (2020) draw an interesting parallel with the regional

concept of spread and backwash effects, conceptualized by Myrdal (1957).



Classifying cities in the Randstad

In this chapter we explore why one city profits from metropolitan integration in the sense of

borrowing size, whereas another may face the agglomeration shadows of nearby cities. We present

a case study of the Randstad Holland region, a classic example of a multicentric metropolitan

region (see Hall, 1966; Kloosterman and Musterd, 2001). We will first classify cities by

positioning them in the ‘borrowed size/agglomeration shadow’ framework. Then, we will seek for

factors that can be associated with this classification.
       The Randstad is not just a multicentric region, as the rather equal size distribution of its

main cities (Amsterdam, Rotterdam, The Hague, Utrecht) also makes it polycentric. It may seem

that this means that there are no secondary cities in the region, but the opposite is true. There are

many other medium-sized cities (for example, Haarlem, Leiden, Dordrecht, Delft, to name but a

few) as well as numerous smaller ones. There is no precise or formal delimitation of the Randstad

– meaning the population estimate varies between 7 and 8 million inhabitants – and only about a

third of this population lives in the four main cities; thus, the presence of the secondary cities is

very important and the region is truly multicentric. Some proxy the area by the four provinces it

covers, but we adopt a more commonly agreed upon delimitation that excludes the (former) island

of Goeree-Overflakkee, the Noordoostpolder, most of the north of Holland (for example Alkmaar)

and the Noordoostpolder in Flevoland province. ‘Our’ Randstad had 7.46 million inhabitants in

January 2018 (see Figure 2.1). Generally, the cities in the Randstad all have distinct histories and

identities and they share a long trajectory of being related to and also competing with each other.

Only a few places can be considered suburban new towns – but such ‘growth poles’, stemming

from the 1980s, have also developed their own identities that fuel, compete with and are related to

the larger neighbouring city that once acted as their metropolis in the proper Greek meaning of

that word (the mother city from which settlers came). Our unit of analysis will be the 120

municipalities in the Randstad.
Figure 2.1: The Randstad Holland




These municipalities will be positioned in the ‘borrowed size/agglomeration shadow’ quadrant

matrix, which requires us to assess, first, the connection between their size and the urban functions

present in the city. Second, we explore the connection between their size and their performance in

terms of urban dynamics. We proxy urban functions with two variables: the number of jobs (2016;

data from Statistics Netherlands) and the presence of restaurants (2011, data from the Bedrijfschap

Horeca en Catering). We used 2011 data, as this measurement allowed us to compare the

development of restaurants over the 1996–2011 period. Several studies have used restaurants as a

proxy for the presence of agglomeration benefits, their number to proxy advantages of scale and

their variety to explain advantages of scope (Schiff, 2015; De Vos and Meijers, 2019). Here,

performance was proxied with the population growth (2002–18) and the development of the

number of restaurants (1996–2011).
       Obviously, one of the omissions of the current ‘borrowed size/agglomeration shadow’

framework is that many places do not have more or less urban functions than expected given their

size, or a development trajectory that is better or worse: many places simply have the expected

number of functions or development dynamics. As such, the four quadrant framework needs to

evolve into a nine square matrix that allows for this classification. Each of the nine squares can be

labelled according to its most defining characteristic. The two squares in the upper right can both

be titled ‘borrowed functions’ and the two in the bottom left both classify as ‘borrowed

performance’. Figure 2.2 presents this extended framework.
Figure 2.2: The extended ‘borrowed size/agglomeration shadow’ framework
       To position the cities, we calculated the number of restaurants and jobs per capita for the

120 municipalities in the Randstad. The average number of restaurants per 1,000 people was 0.55

(standard deviation (SD) = 0.30), with a minimum of 0.17 and a maximum of 2.47. The average

number of jobs per 1,000 people was 40.11 (SD = 15.55), with values ranging from 17 to 107.

Those places that had jobs and restaurants above the mean + 0.75 SD were considered to have

more functions than expected. Likewise, those that had greater than 0.75 SD below the average

value, were considered to have fewer functions than expected.

       A similar procedure was applied to explore whether population growth and development

of functions (restaurants) was above or below the expected value. The average population growth

in the Randstad region was 8.4 per cent over the 2002–18 period (SD = 10.79), and the average

increase in restaurants was 9.69 per cent (SD = 29.32). Again, we used deviations in excess of 0.75

SD to determine which places performed better or worse than expected.

       One complication with this procedure is that in quite a few cases a place performs better

according to one indicator, but worse according to another that measures the same dimension. For

instance, a place may have more jobs than expected, but less restaurants than predicted for its size.

In those cases, if a place scores better or worse on one indicator, and as expected on the other, we

categorized it as scoring better or worse. In the unusual case that a place scored better on one

indicator and worse than expected according to the other, we classified it as ‘as expected’ on this

dimension, unless the average standardized score was still above 0.75 SD (categorized as ‘better

than expected) or below 0.75 SD (worse than expected). This resulted in the following

classification of Randstad municipalities (Figure 2.3).
Figure 2.3: Classification of municipalities in the Randstad


                                                                   Connection
      Dimensions of                                            size → function
      borrowed size
                             Fewer functions than             As many functions as              More functions than
                              expected given size                  expected                     expected given size
                             Agglomeration shadow
                               Dronten, Maassluis,
                Performs       Nissewaard, Strijen,
                 less well                                      Performance shadow                Borrowed functions
                               Oegstgeest, Kaag en
                                                            Blaricum, Huizen, Dordrecht,         Zoeterwoude, Ouder-
                   than      Braassem, Papendrecht,
                                                          Montfoort, Veenendaal, Zederik,           Amstel, Laren,
                expected         Hardinxveld-G.,
                                                          Bloemendaal, Vlaardingen, Soest             Gorinchem
                             Oostzaan, Binnenmaas,
                given size
                              Korendijk, Oudewater,
                              Haarlemmerliede en S.
                                                                     As expected
                                                               Ridderkerk, Cromstrijen,
                                                         Zoetermeer, Amstelveen, Leerdam,
                               Functional shadow
                                                           Lelystad, Zaanstad, Nieuwkoop,         Borrowed functions
                               Rhenen, Landsmeer,
                                                            Zwijndrecht, Capelle a/d IJssel,    Amsterdam, The Hague,
  Connection                  Heemskerk, Zuidplas,
                                                           Uithoorn, Oud-Beijerland, Baarn,      Westland, Beverwijk,
                Performs          Alblasserdam,
                                                              Hillegom, Woerden, De Bilt,          Renswoude, Zeist,
   size →                   Voorschoten, IJsselstein,
                   as             Hellevoetsluis,
                                                            Beemster, Westvoorne, Brielle,        Haarlem, Hilversum,
 performance    expected                                  Giessenlanden, Noordwijkerhout,       Wijdemeren, Delft, Lisse,
                                Heemstede, Lopik,
                                                         Bodegraven-R., Wassenaar, Weesp,        Noordwijk, Utrechtse
                              Eemnes, Molenwaard,
                                                            Krimpenerwaard, Purmerend,           Heuvelrug, Sliedrecht,
                             Wormerland, Leiderdorp,
                                                         Katwijk, Alphen a/d Rijn, Teylingen,   Zandvoort, Nieuwegein
                                Krimpen a/d IJssel
                                                          Schiedam, Gooise Meren, Stichtse
                                                           Vecht, De Ronde Venen, Velsen,
                                                                   Waterland, Gouda
                              Borrowed performance                                                   Borrowed size
                Performs        Pijnacker-N., Houten,                                            Barendrecht, Diemen,
                  better      Lansingerland, Uitgeest,        Borrowed performance                Aalsmeer, Utrecht,
                             Albrandswaard, Hendrik-      Midden-Delfland, Bunschoten,                  Vianen,
                   than        Ido-Ambacht, Almere,        Bunnik, Waddinxveen, Edam-             Haarlemmermeer,
                expected         Wijk bij Duurstede,     Volendam, Leusden, Woudenberg           Rijswijk, Amersfoort,
                given size   Castricum, Leidschendam-                                             Leiden, Rotterdam
                                      Voorburg
Explaining patterns in the Randstad

Research approach

In what follows we will explore which factors correlate with whether a place is able to borrow

performance, functions, size or, instead, faces a performance or functional shadow. In this

explorative phase, we will consider six possible factors using descriptive methods to explore their

association with our classification.

       First, it can be assumed that path dependency plays a role. Places that were traditionally

important centres for their region may have retained that historically established position, even

though other places may have grown faster. For each contemporary municipality, we identified the

largest city and considered its population size in 1849. The first census in the Netherlands is from

this year. We subsequently constructed an indicator that gives the rank of a city in 1849. The higher

ranked (so, the lower the number), the more historically important a city is.

       Second, we simply assume that size plays a role. In line with previous findings (Burger et

al, 2015; Meijers et al, 2016), the general pattern seems to be that larger cities more often borrow

size, while smaller places are more likely to experience an agglomeration shadow. We use

population size for 2016.

       Third, we consider the sectoral composition of the local economy, which has long been

known (Echevarria, 1997) to lead to unbalanced growth (Gardiner et al, 2013). Here, we calculated

the ratio between white-collar workers (employees in the public and private services sector) and

blue-collar workers (employees in construction and manufacturing). We assume that high scores

are associated with function-rich places. Data on sectoral composition of the economy of

municipalities is available through Statistics Netherlands, and refers to the year 2016.
       Fourth, we include the social status score. This is a composite measure reflecting residents’

level of education, position in the labour market and income, and is calculated by the Netherlands

Institute for Social Research. Since it is calculated at the neighbourhood spatial scale, we

calculated a population-weighted average at the municipal level. Data is for 2016. We assume that

places with a lower social status are more often in the shadow of other places.

       Our fifth factor appeals quite literally to the idea that cities can borrow size in networks

(Meijers et al, 2016), and that networks may substitute for the benefits of agglomeration

(Johansson and Quigley, 2004). We created a network embeddedness factor to find out whether

places that are more strongly related to other places do indeed perform better or have more

functions than expected. In other scientific fields, the co-occurrence of phenomena in texts is used

as an indicator of their relatedness, and likewise we can assume that when two cities are often

mentioned in the same breath, they are related to each other, more so than cities that are hardly

mentioned together. Important to understand is that this conceptualization of relatedness is broader

than connections or physical flows between cities. Our measure of relatedness is based on the co-

occurrence of Dutch place names in all (25 million) websites with the .nl extension (the most

commonly used extension in the Netherlands) – see Meijers and Peris (2019) for its exact

calculation. The absolute pattern of relationships, based on the frequency of co-occurrences, was

explained by applying the gravity model. This allowed us to gain a relative understanding of the

importance of a relationship. For instance, Rotterdam and Amsterdam are the cities that are most

often mentioned together on Dutch websites, but you also expect this to be the case given the sheer

size of both cities and the limited distance between them. If we correct for the size of the places,

and the distance between them, by using the gravity model, we are able to compare predicted

strengths of relationships between places with actual strengths (co-occurrences). Predicted values
of less than 0, which happened for pairs of small villages far from each other, were set at 0. Our

indicator gives the aggregated difference between all predicted values of the strength of the

relationship with almost 1,700 other Dutch places, and the actual value. To move from place level

to municipal level, we approximated the municipal network embeddedness with the relationships

of the place that gave its name to a municipality, and when no such place name was used, we took

the largest place in that municipality. In the handful of cases where the municipal name is

composed of two place names, we took the average values.

       Sixth, a clear example of a means through which size can be borrowed is tourism, as tourists

temporarily add to the size and hence support base for functions, while this sector has also grown

considerably in many places. Our ‘tourism’ indicator gives the number of hotel beds per capita in

2011 – data is derived from the Bedrijfschap Horeca en Catering.



Results: aggregate patterns

We explore the association between six categories of our ‘borrowed size/agglomeration shadow’

framework and these six factors through a series of box plots (Figures 2.4–2.9; for visibility, we

leave out the ‘as expected’ category). The colours used refer to the colours given to these categories

in Figures 2.2 and 2.3.
Figure 2.4: Historical importance




The pattern regarding the historical importance of places is quite clear. Places that were important

170 years ago tend to be relatively more represented in the ‘borrowed size’ and ‘borrowed

function’ category. Most of them seem to have kept their functional centrality and, consequently,

we don’t find the most historically important places in a ‘functional shadow’ or in the ‘borrowed

performance’ category. The historically most important place that is now in an agglomeration

shadow is Maassluis – this former fishing town close to Rotterdam seems to have become

overshadowed by its larger neighbour. On the other side, Haarlemmermeer was totally

insignificant in 1849 (ranked 119 out of 120), and now borrows size. It is the municipality close

to Amsterdam where Schiphol Airport is located – an obvious case of borrowing size indeed.

Places that borrow performance tend to be historically less important. Hence, their growth may be

explained more in terms of suburbanization – actually several growth centres are included here:

for example, Almere, Houten, Lansingerland, Pijnacker-Nootdorp (see Figure 2.5).
Figure 2.5: Population size




Turning to contemporary importance in terms of size, it is quite obvious that larger cities are more

often in the borrowed size or the borrowed functions category. Almere is growing rapidly and can

be considered in many ways a suburb of Amsterdam, but its position in the borrowed performance

class means that it has not been able to develop functional importance (yet). Smaller cities are

more often in a functional or agglomeration shadow. Nissewaard, including the city of Spijkenisse,

is also not able to live up to the expectations created by its size – this is an example of one of the

earlier growth poles near Rotterdam that grew rapidly due to industrialization in the 1970s and

1980s but has stagnated in more recent years – perhaps in many ways similar to the ‘first suburban

ring’ in the US.
Figure 2.6: Economic structure




The economic structure does play a role in positioning cities in our framework (see Figure 2.6).

Those in which manufacturing is stronger, and which have relatively fewer services, tend to

experience an agglomeration shadow more often, while the median values of places in

performance and functional shadows suggest the same for those categories. The local economy of

places that ‘borrow’ tends to be more characterized by services.
Figure 2.7: Social status




In terms of social status, the pattern is rather mixed – or simply absent (see Figure 2.7). The social

status of places in the agglomeration shadow does not seem to differ too much from those that

borrow size. In fact, the place with the lowest social status – Rotterdam – is borrowing size.

Noteworthy perhaps is that places that are growing more tend to have a somewhat higher social

status, while quite a few municipalities that are in a performance shadow are among the socially

weaker. A link can be established with the fact that those places in the borrowed performance

category include more recent suburban areas to which relatively affluent families tend to migrate.
Figure 2.8: Network embeddedness




The boxplot for network embeddedness is interesting from various perspectives (see Figure 2.8).

First of all, the places that borrow size are much more related to other places, whereas at the

opposite end, those that are in an agglomeration shadow have far fewer relationships with other

places. Second, places that borrow function also seem to be able to do so because they have

stronger relationships. Third, places in a performance shadow also tend to be slightly more related

to other places. This seems to call for further analysis in the types and directions of relationships,

an issue that needs to be taken on board when the toponym co-occurrences method is further

developed. Their opposite – the places that borrow performance – are actually less strongly related

to other places. We had expected that places in a functional shadow would also have stronger

relationships with other places, to make up for the lack of functions locally, but this is not the case.
Figure 2.9: Tourism




Tourism adds, temporarily, to the size of a place, and is one of the clearest examples of borrowed

size from elsewhere (see Figure 2.9). It obviously has a positive impact on the functions in a place,

as the borrowed size and borrowed function categories are more touristic. However, it does not

lead to borrowed performance. Places in a shadow – whatever type – tend to be less touristy. Note

that our indicator – hotel beds – does not just refer to touristic places; places that are central in

business networks also pop up. The clearest example is Haarlemmermeer (Schiphol).



Results: functional dimension

Figure 2.10 presents the association between our factors and whether places have more or fewer

functions than expected given their size. When comparing municipalities that have more functions

(N = 30) with those that have fewer functions (N = 38), it turns out that municipalities that punch

above their demographic weight are those that are: (a) historically important: t(66) = -4.0, p = .000;
(b) larger: t(30) = 2.5, p = .017; (c) have a lower social status: t(66) = -2.2, p = .033; and (d) draw

more tourists: t(32) = 2.4, p = .022. Somewhat counterintuitive is that places with a lower social

status manage to have more functions than expected. Perhaps this is because function-rich larger

cities are often also home to lower social classes, in addition to a comparatively smaller upper

class. While places that do better also seem to have a more services-oriented economy, this

difference between ‘more’ and ‘fewer’ functions was not statistically significant. Finally, and

perhaps most strikingly, places with stronger relationships with other places tend to have more

functions: t(66) = 4.9, p = .000. This provides an important empirical underpinning for the

proposition that networks substitute for size.

       We also ran an ordinal regression model explaining the score on the functional dimension,

and including all six covariates simultaneously. In this model, tourism and network embeddedness

turned out to be significant factors (p <0.05), with historical importance being significant only at

the p <0.10 level.



Results: performance dimension

When zooming in on just the performance dimension, associations with most of the six factors

become clearer (Figure 2.11). In comparison to places that underperform, places that grow faster

seem to be: (a) historically more important; (b) larger; (c) have a higher social status; (d) have

more service sector jobs; (e) have more visiting tourists; and (f) are more strongly related to other

places. However, comparing the mean scores for the ‘better’ and ‘worse’ categories renders only

the difference in size significant, t(28) = 2.1, p = .046. The difference in tourism is significant only

at the p = .094 level, t(50) = 1.7. Note that there are just 27 municipalities in the ‘better’ category

and 26 in the ‘worse’ category, while at least N = 30 is recommendable for independent samples
t-tests. All in all, this performance dimension shows weaker differences between the categories in

comparison to the functional dimension.

       An ordinal regression model explaining the score on performance and including again the

six covariates, identified social status as the most significant factor (p = 0.028), followed by

population size (p = 0.052) and network embeddedness (p = 0.091).
Figure 2.10: Borrowed functions
Figure 2.11: Borrowed performance
Conclusion

While much attention has been devoted to understanding city network externalities, as a substitute

and/or complement to agglomeration externalities, research has focused much less on how the

costs and benefits of the further integration of cities in networks are distributed over the cities in

the network of cities. The ‘borrowed size/agglomeration shadow’ framework (Meijers and Burger,

2017) proposed previously to identify the different outcomes of network integration at the scale of

individual cities was taken as a point of departure in this chapter. We have proposed a further

refinement of this original four quadrant matrix, and now identify seven possible local outcomes

of network integration. Cities can: (1) experience an agglomeration shadow; (2) experience a

performance shadow; (3) experience a functional shadow; (4) perform as expected; (5) borrow

functions; (6) borrow performance; and (7) borrow size.

       This elaboration of possible local outcomes was further explored and tested for the

Randstad Holland region, a classic multicentric and polycentric urban region in the Netherlands.

Each of the 120 municipalities in this metropolitan region (7.5 million inhabitants) was positioned

in the elaborated ‘borrowed size/agglomeration shadow’ framework. In terms of the secondary

cities that resemble the definition used in this book (see Chapter 1) most are positioned in very

different quadrants. Some face a ‘performance shadow’ (Dordrecht, Vlaardingen), some perform

as expected (Schiedam, Zaanstad), while others ‘borrow functions’ (Delft, Haarlem, Hilversum)

and two manage to ‘borrow size’ (Amersfoort, Leiden). While it is noteworthy that none of these

cities has fewer functions than expected, these varied positions at the same time suggest that the

group of ‘secondary cities’ is quite heterogeneous, as is also discussed in Chapter 5, this volume.

The ‘first cities’ either borrow functions (Amsterdam, The Hague) or borrow size (Utrecht,

Rotterdam).
       Given this heterogeneity, it makes sense to explore how local conditions are associated

with the positioning of cities. In this chapter, we associated six factors with this positioning:

historical importance, size, sectoral composition of the local economy, social status, network

embeddedness and tourism. All factors seem to play a role in the positioning. This role is

sometimes easier to understand when looking at the functional and performance dimensions of the

‘borrowed size/agglomeration shadow’ framework separately.

       Places that have more functions than expected are associated with being historically

important, and also with being more populous, while this population on average has a lower social

status. But most particularly, they draw relatively more tourists (a very clear example of borrowing

size of course) and they are much more strongly related to other cities than places that have fewer

functions than expected. This provides clear support for the idea that networks substitute for size.

       Places that witnessed stronger development since the late 1990s, are, in comparison to

places that underperformed, characterized by a greater population size, while they also have a

higher social status and draw more tourists, and more relations with other cities (network

embeddedness). The boxplots in Figure 2.11 presented suggest some evidence for the two

remaining factors.

       While processes of further integration are positive for the region as a whole, the benefits

and costs are not spread evenly over primary and different types of secondary cities. Our results

suggest that local circumstances and path dependencies may influence the capacity to exploit

processes of integration in multicentric metropolitan areas. One could argue that cities have

different roles to play in such a region, after all, the essence of networks is that they allow for

specialization. But this does require insight into the new interdependencies and a regional planning
strategic framework to make the most of the possibilities of metropolitan network integration,

especially if we are to ensure that costs and benefits of this process are spread more evenly.

        It may have been noted that we refer to those relationships as associations and not as causal

relationships. We believe that this fits better with the explorative nature of the empirical analysis

here presented. But the issue of causality is of great importance, and in many ways deserves further

careful analysis. This analysis may be more a matter of discussing the evolution of secondary cities

in relation to first cities in the region than of mere quantitative statistical analysis to establish

causality, since historical pathways are likely to play a key role. The city of Dordrecht, for instance,

was definitely one of the most important Dutch cities in the 16th and 17th centuries. But it has

gradually been overshadowed by Rotterdam, which, among other factors, enjoyed a more

favourable location for trade and political prioritization, translating into more public investment in

the last century when its large harbour and associated industrial complexes were considered the

economic engine of the Netherlands. Of course, the growth and decline of the most important

economic sectors are likely to play key roles, as is perhaps sheer coincidence. For instance,

Schiphol airport, in the last decades another engine of economic growth, would probably have

been relocated from its current position near Amsterdam to a place near Leiden and The Hague by

the end of the 1930s if the war with Germany had not loomed on the horizon. Therefore, through

such historical accounts, we may get an understanding of why some cities possess the factors that

seem to allow them to borrow size, whereas others lack them.

       Importantly, such accounts will also reveal that there are shifts in the positioning of some

cities – those that borrow size nowadays may have faced agglomeration shadows in the past. It is

very possible that we will witness a shift in the coming decade (2030) – the quick rise of

agglomeration costs in the largest cities (rents, congestion, ‘touristification’ of city centres) already
leads to many spillover effects in nearby places, a process likely to be further aggravated by the

need for space during pandemics like COVID-19. There is one important difference, though, with

previous patterns in suburbanization. The households and firms that are attached to the urban way

of life do not move to nearby ‘bedroom communities’ that lack urban charm, but ‘hop over’ to

secondary cities that tend to be well connected and rich in functions and that have historical urban

character and identity – an emerging process in the Netherlands that we could perhaps call ‘hop-

over urbanization’. Consequently, in addition to our ‘snapshot’ that was based on a rather limited

number of indicators to capture the functional and performance dimensions of each city, further

research could adopt a dynamic perspective and try to explain shifts in positions of cities, thereby

building on a more comprehensive analysis of: (a) proxies for functions and performance; and (b)

a larger set of factors that can be associated with these two dimensions. It is not unlikely that this

leads to the observation that cities have simultaneous and overlapping experiences with borrowing

and shadowing, demanding a more careful account of their position.

       The issue of causality is also pertinent when it comes to the role of relationships between

pairs of cities and the networks these shape at the scale of the urban system. Do these relationships

develop because of the many functions a city has, or do these relationships indeed substitute for

size and allow a city to sustain more functions? Both explanations are obviously possible, and, for

instance, an instrumented variables approach may add some clarity here. Also, there are many

opportunities to further elaborate the network embeddedness variable, such as considering network

embeddedness on different spatial scales or, in the case of secondary cities, the levels of

relationship with just the first city. There are many exciting research avenues possible that can

build on, and further develop, the approach and the framework presented and explored here.
References

Alderson, A.S. and Beckfield J. (2004) ‘Power and position in the world city system’, American
       Journal of Sociology, 109(4): 811–51.

Alonso, W. (1973) ‘Urban zero population growth’, Daedalus, 102(4): 191–206.

Batty, M., Xie, Y. and Sun Z. (1999) ‘Modeling urban dynamics through GIS-based cellular
       automata’, Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 23(3): 205–33.

Bel, G. and Fageda, X. (2008) ‘Getting there fast: globalization, intercontinental flights and
       location of headquarters’, Journal of Economic Geography, 8(4): 471–95.

Bettencourt, L.M.A., Lobo, J., Helbing, D., Kühnert, C. and West, G.B. (2007) ‘Growth,
       innovation, scaling, and the pace of life in cities’, Proceedings of the National Academy of
       Sciences of the United States of America, 104(17): 7301–6.

Boix, R. and Trullén, J. (2007) ‘Knowledge, networks of cities and growth in regional urban
       systems’, Papers in Regional Science, 86(4): 551–74.

Bourne, L.S. and Simmons, J.W. (eds) (1978) Systems of Cities: Readings on Structure, Growth,
      and Policy, New York: Oxford University Press.

Bretagnolle, A. and Pumain, D. (2010) ‘Simulating urban networks through multiscalar space-time
       dynamics: Europe and the United States, 17th–20th centuries’, Urban Studies, 47(13):
       2819–39.

Burger, M.J. and Meijers, E.J. (2016) ‘Agglomerations and the rise of urban network externalities’,
       Papers in Regional Science, 95(1): 5–15.

Burger, M.J., Meijers, E.J., Hoogerbrugge, M.M. and Tresserra, J.M. (2015) ‘Borrowed size,
       agglomeration shadows and cultural amenities in north-west Europe’, European Planning
       Studies, 23(6): 1090–109.

Camagni, R. (1993) ‘From city hierarchy to city networks: reflections about an emerging
     paradigm’, in T.R. Lakshmanan and P. Nijkamp (eds) Structure and Change in the Space
     Economy: Festschrift in Honour of Martin Beckmann, Berlin: Springer Verlag, pp 66–87.

Capello, R. (2000) ‘The city network paradigm: measuring urban network externalities’, Urban
       Studies, 37(11): 1925–45.

Capello, R. and Camagni, R. (2000) ‘Beyond optimal city size: an evaluation of alternative urban
       growth patterns’, Urban Studies, 37(9): 1479–96.
Champion, A.G. (2001) ‘A changing demographic regime and evolving polycentric urban regions:
     consequences for the size, composition and distribution of city populations’, Urban
     Studies, 38(4): 657–77.

De Vos, D. and Meijers, E. (2019) ‘Information technology and local product variety: substitution,
      complementarity and spillovers’, Tijdschrift voor Economische en Sociale Geografie,
      110(4): 486–506.

De Vries, J. (1984) European Urbanization 1500–1800, London: Methuen.

Echevarria, C. (1997) ‘Changes in sectoral composition associated with economic growth’,
      International Economic Review, 38(2): 431–52.

ESPON (European Spatial Planning Observation Network) (2005) ‘ESPON 1.1.1. Potentials for
     polycentric development in Europe’, ESPON and Nordregio Project Report (rev. version),
     Brussels and Stockholm.

ESPON (European Spatial Planning Observation Network) (2011) ‘ESPON 1.4.3 Study on urban
     functions, 2007’, ULB IGEAT/ESPON Project Report (updated version), Brussels and
     Luxembourg.

Fujita, M., Krugman, P. and Mori, T. (1999) ‘On the evolution of hierarchical urban
        systems, European Economic Review, 43(2): 209–51.

Gabaix, X. and Ioannides, Y.M. (2004) ‘The evolution of city size distributions’, in J.V.
      Henderson and J.-F. Thisse (eds) Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, vol. 4,
      Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp 2341–78.

Gardiner, B., Martin, R., Sunley, P. and Tyler, P. (2013) ‘Spatially unbalanced growth in the
       British economy’, Journal of Economic Geography, 13(6): 889–928.

Hall, P. (1966) The World Cities, London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.

Hincks, S., Deas, I. and Haughton, G. (2017) ‘Real geographies, real economies and soft spatial
       imaginaries: creating a “more than Manchester” region’, International Journal of Urban
       and Regional Research, 41(4): 642–57.

Hoggart, K. (2005) The City’s Hinterland: Dynamism and Divergence in Europe’s Peri-Urban
      Territories, London: Routledge.

Hohenberg, P.M. and Lees, L.H. (1985) The Making of Urban Europe, 1000–1950, Cambridge,
      MA: Harvard University Press.

Johansson, B. and Quigley, J. (2004) ‘Agglomeration and networks in spatial economies’, Papers
       in Regional Science, 83(1): 165–76.
Kloosterman, R.C. and Musterd, S. (2001) ‘The polycentric urban region: towards a research
       agenda’, Urban Studies, 38(4): 623–33.

Krugman, P. (1991) Geography and Trade, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Krugman, P. (1993) ‘On the number and location of cities’, European Economic Review, 37(2):
     293–8.

Lefèvre, C. (1998) ‘Metropolitan government and governance in Western countries: a critical
       review’, International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 22(1): 9–25.

McCann, P. and Acs, Z.J. (2011) ‘Globalization: countries, cities and multinationals’, Regional
     Studies, 45(1): 17–32.

Maly, J. (2016) ‘Small towns in the context of “borrowed size” and “agglomeration shadow”
       debates: the case of the South Moravian Region (Czech Republic)’, European Countryside,
       8(4): 333–50.

Meijers, E.J. (2005) ‘Polycentric urban regions and the quest for synergy: is a network of cities
       more than the sum of the parts?’, Urban Studies, 42(4): 765–81.

Meijers, E.J. and Burger, M.J. (2017) ‘Stretching the concept of “borrowed size”’, Urban Studies,
       54(1): 269–91.

Meijers, E.J. and Peris, A. (2019) ‘Using toponym co-occurrences to measure relationships
       between places: review, application and evaluation’, International Journal of Urban
       Sciences, 23(2): 246–68.

Meijers, E.J., Burger, M.J. and Hoogerbrugge, M.M. (2016) ‘Borrowing size in networks of cities:
       city size, network connectivity and metropolitan functions in Europe’, Papers in Regional
       Science, 95(1): 181–98.

Meijers, E.J., Hoogerbrugge, M. and Cardoso, R. (2018) ‘Beyond polycentricity: does stronger
       integration between cities in polycentric urban regions improve performance?’, Tijdschrift
       voor Economische en Sociale Geografie, 109(1): 1–21.

Meijers, E.J., Hoekstra, J., Leijten, M., Louw, E. and Spaans, M. (2012) ‘Connecting the periphery:
       distributive effects of new infrastructure’, Journal of Transport Geography, 22: 187–98.

Myrdal, G. (1957) Economic Theory and Underdeveloped Regions, London: Hutchinson.

Neal, Z. (2013) The Connected City: How Networks are Shaping the Modern Metropolis, New
       York: Routledge.

Parr, J.B. (2004) ‘The polycentric urban region: a closer inspection’, Regional Studies, 38(3): 231–
        40.
Partridge, M.D., Rickman, D.S., Ali, K. and Olfert, M.R. (2008) ‘Lost in space: population growth
        in the American hinterlands and small cities’, Journal of Economic Geography, 8(6): 727–
        57.

Peris, A., Meijers, E. and van Ham, M. (2018) ‘The evolution of the systems of cities literature
        since 1995: schools of thought and their interaction’, Networks and Spatial Economics,
        18(3): 533–54.

Pred, A. (1977) City-Systems in Advanced Economies: Past Growth, Present Processes, and
       Future Development Options, New York: Wiley.

Preston, J. (2001) ‘Integrating transport with socio-economic activity: a research agenda for the
       new millennium’, Journal of Transport Geography, 9(1): 13–24.

Schiff, N. (2015) ‘Cities and product variety: evidence from restaurants’, Journal of Economic
        Geography, 15(6): 1085–123.

Taylor, P.J. (2003) World City Network: A Global Urban Analysis, London: Routledge.

Taylor, P.J. and Derudder, B. (2016) World City Network: A Global Urban Analysis (2nd edn),
       Abingdon: Routledge.

Van Oort, F., Burger, M. and Raspe, O. (2010) ‘On the economic foundation of the urban network
      paradigm: spatial integration, functional integration and economic complementarities
      within the Dutch Randstad’, Urban Studies, 47(4): 725–48.

Volgmann, K. and Rusche, K. (2020) ‘The geography of borrowing size: exploring spatial
     distributions for German urban regions’, Tijdschrift Voor Economische En Sociale
     Geografie, 111(1): 60–79.
