[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: journal/A24-sohn-licheron-meijers-2022-border-cities-out-of-the-shadow-10.1111-pirs.12653.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Title:           Border cities: Out of the shadow
Subject:         F15; R11; R12
Keywords:        agglomeration shadow; border effects; borrowed size; European border cities; potential urban interaction
Author:          Christophe Sohn
Creator:         Elsevier
Producer:        Acrobat Distiller 6.0 for Windows
CreationDate:    Mon Apr  4 11:26:53 2022 WIB
ModDate:         Mon Nov  6 22:03:12 2023 WIB
Custom Metadata: yes
Metadata Stream: yes
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            none
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           23
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       484.724 x 697.323 pts
Page rot:        0
File size:       507497 bytes
Optimized:       no
PDF version:     1.7
[Extracted Text]
Received: 10 June 2021         Revised: 29 September 2021   Accepted: 7 December 2021

DOI: 10.1111/pirs.12653



FULL ARTICLE




Border cities: Out of the shadow

Christophe Sohn1                      |      Julien Licheron1             | Evert Meijers2

1
    Luxembourg Institute of Socio-Economic
Research, Luxembourg
                                                    Abstract
2
    Utrecht University, Netherlands                 Being in the sphere of influence of other cities can have
                                                    benefits as it allows cities to “borrow size,” but this can also
Correspondence
                                                    lead to competition effects known as “agglomeration
Christophe Sohn, Luxembourg Institute of
Socio-Economic Research, 11 Porte des               shadows.” This paper examines how these patterns of bor-
Sciences, L-4366 Esch-sur-Alzette,                  rowing and shadowing differ from domestic settings when
Luxembourg.
Email: christophe.sohn@liser.lu
                                                    there is a national border between the cities. We find that
                                                    borders moderate the normal regularities of a settlement
                                                    system. Particularly, there is no shadow effect cast by larger
                                                    cities across borders; borders protect. Cross-border market
                                                    integration benefits especially similar-sized border cities.
                                                    Given these unique advantages, it is time for border cities
                                                    to step out of the shadows.

                                                    KEYWORDS
                                                    agglomeration shadow, border effects, borrowed size, European
                                                    border cities, potential urban interaction

                                                    JEL CLASSIFICATION
                                                    F15, R11, R12




1       |    I N T RO DU CT I O N

In Europe, almost 37% of the population resides in a border region (Eurostat, 2020). Around 80% of these 169 million
inhabitants live in cities and urbanized regions whose socio-economic development and territorial governance are
influenced by the proximity to a border (Sohn & Stambolic, 2015). Despite its scope and ambition, European integra-
tion has not eliminated all border barriers and related obstacles (Camagni et al., 2019). The resurgence of borders in
the political agendas of states even seems to indicate a hardening of border regimes. The temporary reintroduction
of border controls and the outright closing of certain intra-Schengen borders during the COVID-19 pandemic have
recently underlined how salient the vulnerability of European borderlands remains (Medeiros et al., 2020). Alongside
the increasing recognition of the territorial and socio-economic issues faced by border regions, the analysis of the


© 2022 The Authors. Papers in Regional Science © 2021 Regional Science Association International.

Pap Reg Sci. 2022;101:417–438.                                                    wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/pirs   417
418                                                                                                             SOHN ET AL.



effects of borders on the growth of cross-border areas is experiencing renewed interest in regional studies and
regional science (Makkonen & Williams, 2016). This paper continues this debate by bringing two thriving literatures
in regional studies and regional science into conversation with each other, namely the literature on urban network
externalities, and the literature on border effects.
      It is increasingly acknowledged that urban network externalities arising at the scale of multicentric urban
regions or at the level of global city networks represent important drivers of urban growth and performance. In prin-
ciple, this growing interest in the externalities of urban networks (either regionally or internationally) should take
into account the role of territorial boundaries, as many of the connections between cities span across national bor-
ders. This seems particularly relevant in the European case, given the continent's high degree of territorial fragmen-
tation and the varying levels of regional integration at work. In practice, however, the territorial anchoring of cities
and their more or less close proximity to borders is largely ignored. In a context of globalization, the international
connectivity of large cities has captured most of the attention (Taylor, 2011), thereby obscuring the attention paid
to regionalized relationships, including those between smaller and medium-sized cities. As for the study of polycen-
tric urban patterns, cross-border cases are only rarely considered. In order to fill these knowledge gaps, this paper
addresses the question how borders moderate the impact of having neighbouring cities on their metropolitan
performance.
      How to measure interactions between cities, and in its wake urban network externalities, remains a critical
research issue despite attempts to do so in a variety of scholarly domains (Peris et al., 2018) and bringing in
network-analytical approaches (Derudder, 2021). In particular, data on urban interactions at the city scale is hard to
find, certainly if the data collection involves multiple countries. On the regional scale, this is typically solved by
assuming that cities that are located close to each other and whose functional regions or spheres of influence over-
lap, have a certain degree of integration. Attention then turns to outcomes of this integration at the regional scale,
and how these vary according to their characteristics, such as size. For instance, it has been shown that cities that
are part of polycentric urban regions can sustain a higher level of metropolitan functions than an individual city
could, but the distribution of those advantages over the different, but rather equally-sized cities in the region is not
necessarily equal (Meijers & Burger, 2017). Larger cities, or cities of similar size, will usually have more functions than
expected given their size, which is referred to as “borrowed size” as they draw on the support base of other cities
nearby. Conversely, increased competition puts smaller cities in the “agglomeration shadow” of their larger neigh-
bouring cities, leaving them underserved in terms of local functions.
      The presence of borders can moderate these general patterns in settlement systems in several ways. On a gen-
eral level, we expect borders’ barrier effects to reduce the opportunity for larger cities to borrow size across borders.
We also expect the shadow effect cast by larger cities over smaller ones to be more modest due to borders’ protec-
tion effect. These moderating effects of borders are expected to be influenced by two additional factors that reflect
border conditions. First, national borders that straddle across the European continent do not present the same insti-
tutional and regulatory constraints and therefore do not necessarily have the same effects. Some borders can be
considered open according to a variable duration which depends on the integration trajectory of the countries con-
cerned, whereas others are still controlled. We expect that the longer borders have been open, the stronger the posi-
tive or negative effects of cross-border urban interactions as captured by the notion of “borrowed size” and
“agglomeration shadows'.” Second, borders present a multidimensional nature and may therefore exert differenti-
ated effects depending on the type of metropolitan functions considered. For that reason, the differentiated sensitiv-
ity of metropolitan functions to cross-border integration is taken into consideration. We hypothesize that market-
driven functions are more likely to follow a more rational spatial distribution induced by cross-border integration
than public-driven functions. For the latter, the persistence of cultural and linguistic barrier effects as well as the pro-
tective effects of territorial sovereignty are expected to induce “inhibitor” effects.
      The empirical analysis is based on the distribution of metropolitan functions in 1,920 European cities, 355 of
which can be considered border cities. With the term “metropolitan functions,” we refer to a broad set of activi-
ties and amenities in the domain of business, science, transport, culture and sports. While we study the effect of
SOHN ET AL.                                                                                                            419



having neighbouring cities on metropolitan performance, we weigh their potential impact on the basis of their spa-
tial proximity as well as their demographic size. For this, we use a gravity equation to compute potential interac-
tions between cities. Based on spatial econometric models, results show that within the same country, borrowed
size effects occur between cities of similar size, whereas larger cities cast an agglomeration shadow over their
smaller neighbouring cities. However, in cross-border contexts, the results indicate that border effects are more
complex than a simple barrier or protection effect vis-à-vis interactions between cities. The borrowed size effect
induced between border cities of similar sizes is stronger than what is observed in a national context. Whereas
there is no effect for controlled borders, the borrowed size effect is positively moderated by the duration of open-
ing of borders. As for the shadow effect exerted by larger cities over smaller ones, there is none in a cross-border
context. Contrary to what is observed in a national context, small and medium border towns benefit from the
proximity of a larger urban centre located on the other side of the border. Cross-border differentials and comple-
mentarities may explain such a border locational advantage. This effect only concerns market-driven functions. As
for public-driven functions, the absence of a competitive effect can be explained by the protection provided by
the border.
    The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of the analysis of region-based urban interac-
tions and border effects, and develops the hypotheses tested in this paper. Section 3 presents the empirical strate-
gies and data used to produce the dependent and explanatory variables. In Section 4, the estimations of the impact
of neighbouring cities and the moderating effects of borders on this impact are presented and the robustness of the
results are examined. Section 5 discusses the results and concludes.



2 | I N T E R A C T I O N S B E T W E E N N E I G H BO UR I N G C I TI E S A N D BO RD E R
E F F E C T S : E X P LO R I NG TH E M I S S I N G L I N K

2.1 | Borrowed size and agglomeration shadow: The two outcomes of interactions
between cities

The basic idea that good interconnections between cities yield important benefits is now widespread. McCann and
Acs (2011) argue that nowadays national and international connectivity is more important for performance than size.
In other words, it seems that “networks substitute for proximity” (Johansson & Quigley, 2004). These considerations
build upon the theoretical framework of “city networks” developed by Camagni (1993) in order to overcome the lim-
itations of the central place model that is emphasizing a territorial hierarchy-type control of market areas
(Christaller, 1966). In order to grasp the economic advantage resulting from the networked relationships between cit-
ies, Capello (2000) coined the term “urban network externalities.” The concept can be described as external econo-
mies from which firms and households can benefit by being located in cities that are well embedded in networks
that connect with other cities (see also Boix & Trullén, 2007; Johansson & Quigley, 2004; Meijers, 2005; Van Oort
et al., 2010). Some empirical studies have shown the presence of such network externalities in the particular context
of multicentric urban regions. For example, it was found that the more closely cities were integrated, the more net-
work externalities were present, while the lack of integration between nearby cities could even lead to negative
urban network externalities (Meijers & Burger, 2017). While positive urban network externalities arise at the level of
multicentric urban regions as a whole, it is also clear that not all individual cities profit from network integration by
definition. It could well be that a generative effect at the level of the network of cities hides an intra-network distrib-
utive effect.
    A recent conceptual framework that captures the possibly different outcomes of strengthened interactions
between cities builds on two concepts: “borrowed size” and “agglomeration shadow.” The concept of borrowed size
was originally proposed by Alonso (1973) to explain the apparent disconnection between size and function of small
cities that were part of a metropolitan area. Meijers and Burger (2017) recently revisited the concept by highlighting
420                                                                                                               SOHN ET AL.



that size borrowing occurs more generally when a city exhibits urban functions normally associated with larger cities.
It is therefore a product of interactions with other cities on multiple spatial scales that provide a substitute for the
benefits of agglomeration. The concept of agglomeration shadow is taken from the new economic geography (NEG)
literature where it emphasizes the negative impact of competition effects. It refers specifically to a situation in which
a city has fewer urban functions, and experiences lower growth than expected given its size, again as a product of
interactions within networks of cities on multiple spatial scales leading to more competition. The two concepts refer
essentially to two sides of the same coin.
      In this paper, we mobilize the concepts of borrowed size and agglomeration shadow with the aim to investigate
how national borders supposedly reduce the influence exerted by nearby cities located within multicentric urban
regions. Our first set of hypothesis relates to the effects of borrowed size, agglomeration shadows and city size in
general. Potential urban interactions predicted by the gravity equation are taken as a proxy of the influence exerted
by cities in a regional context. We thus assume that larger cities and closer cities are probably having a stronger influ-
ence than those that are smaller and located further away. Such an approach was already suggested by Alonso (1973)
when he discussed the original concept of borrowed size. From an empirical perspective, previous research focusing
on European cities has shown that larger cities borrow size from nearby smaller cities (Meijers et al., 2016). In a way,
they “punch above their own weight” as they draw on (or exploit) the support base provided by these surrounding
smaller cities. For this reason, our first hypothesis reads as follows:


        Hypothesis 1. Larger cities benefit from being located close to smaller ones and have consequently
        more metropolitan functions than expected given their size (H1).


      Conversely, larger cities cast an agglomeration shadow over nearby smaller cities due to competition effects.
There may be the occasional exception to the rule that Alonso (1973) referred to when discussing “borrowed size,”
but in general we assume that the presence of many urban functions in a large city leaves little room for smaller sur-
rounding cities to develop urban functions themselves. Growth in the shadow of another city is limited. Therefore,
our second hypothesis states that:


        Hypothesis 2. Smaller cities located near larger ones have less metropolitan functions than expected
        given their size (H2).


      Basically, Hypotheses 1 and 2 mean that in a regional setting marked by the presence of a larger city surrounded
by smaller cities, the larger city benefits from the situation at the expense of smaller cities (in terms of level of metro-
politan functions present). In a multicentric urban area in which the cities are more or less similar sized (we refer to
these as “polycentric urban regions,” which form a subset of multicentric urban regions), several authors have argued
that network synergy effects should benefit all the cities involved (Camagni, 1993; Capello & Rietveld, 1998). In this
case, competitive economies of scale are built-up by the integration of the market of each urban centre. The absence
of a dominant city allows to share the positive effect of integration between cities (Meijers et al., 2018). A third
hypothesis stems from these considerations:


        Hypothesis 3. Nearby cities of more or less equal size have more metropolitan functions than
        expected given their size (H3).


      In the foregoing considerations, the territorial anchoring of cities is not considered. It is as if cities were located
in a continuous space freed from any territorial constraints. This is obviously not the case and the presence of
national borders which filter flows, delimit and differentiate territorial jurisdictions is likely to have significant impacts
on the previously mentioned effects linked to the position of cities in relation to each other. In the next subsection,
we introduce the ways according to which border effects are studied and discuss their possible effects.
SOHN ET AL.                                                                                                           421



2.2      |    The puzzling impact of borders on region-based urban interactions

The impact of regional integration, custom unions and thus the (relative) opening up of national borders has been
the subject of much research. One popular approach to identifying and measuring the effects of borders considers
international trade flows and the costs associated with the presence of political and administrative barriers such as
tariffs. In line with the seminal work of McCallum (1995), gravitational models have been applied and the results
show that the negative effects of borders on trade flows (i.e., lost trade) remain, despite the removal of formal obsta-
cles. The vast majority of these approaches consider the impact of economic integration on countries, and all find a
negative border effect albeit with great variations in its magnitude (Anderson & van Wincoop, 2003; Nitsch, 2000).
Only a few studies of this kind specifically investigate the trade performance of border regions following economic
integration (for a review, see Brülhart, 2011).
      Based on a combination of trade and location theories, NEG inspired studies focus on the spatial effects of eco-
nomic integration, with a greater emphasis on border regions. According to these models, border regions face two
counteracting forces: increased market access and increased import competition (Brülhart et al., 2004). On a theoret-
ical level, there is no consensus on whether border regions benefit from integration (Niebuhr & Stiller, 2004). There
are also no clear-cut conclusions in empirical studies concerning the impact of integration on border regions. For
North America, Hanson (1996, 2001) has shown a positive effect of NAFTA-driven economic integration for the
US-Mexico border regions: the growth of export manufacturing in the Mexican border regions has contributed to
the development of economic activity in the US border regions. In Europe, the focus has been on EU enlargement
eastwards and whether market forces favour eastern border regions. Border regions located close to the richest mar-
kets seem to benefit from economic integration, whereas peripheral border regions show negative or mixed results
(Lafourcade & Paluzie, 2011; Niebuhr, 2008). A few studies have specifically examined the impact of borders on the
development of cities. Using the division of Germany after the Second World War as a natural experiment, Redding
and Sturm (2008) provided evidence that border cities were disadvantaged by the loss of market access caused by
the imposition of a border. Focusing on the effect of European integration, Brakman et al. (2012) found a positive
empirical effect from EU enlargement along the borders. A similar result is found by Gouveia et al. (2020) who
explore the impact of EU enlargements on the growth in population share within border regions. Despite this posi-
tive integration effect, the two previously mentioned studies also found that the general direct effect of borders on
neighbouring cities and regions remains negative and larger. Finally, it appears that the potential gains in population
growth following EU enlargements can be quite asymmetric and differ greatly depending on the economic conditions
of the cities considered (Heider, 2019).
      Recently, two essential but hitherto neglected features of borders have received special attention. The first con-
sideration relates to the dynamic character of border effects. Beyond the commonly accepted idea that border func-
tions evolve with integration shocks or more generally the (geo)political decisions that govern the border regime in
place, it is the way in which border effects change over time that appears worth considering. Some studies have
shown that the effects induced by integration evolve according to the duration of the opening of the border. For
Brakman et al. (2012), the positive integration effect associated with EU enlargements is active for about 20 years;
beyond that, the effects disappear. The prevailing logic here is that with the opening of the border, and therefore the
elimination of certain obstacles, border towns will gradually catch up with their non-border counterparts. In his esti-
mation of the impact of opening borders on regional growth across European border regions, Basboga (2020) also
identifies a positive anticipatory effect three years before borders are effectively opened and also during the seven
years that follow. Conversely, some obstacles like physical barriers or social and cultural differences are likely to per-
sist long after the border opens (Nitsch & Wolf, 2013). Yet, and based on studies that have analysed the persistence
of former borders in integration areas, the longer the duration for which a border has been open, the weaker the bar-
rier effects expected (Wolf, 2005).
      The second consideration refers to the multidimensional nature of borders. Often reduced to political and
administrative barriers in studies that focus on their effects on the flow of goods or on the impact of the
422                                                                                                            SOHN ET AL.



establishment of customs unions (see above), it turns out that borders hide different forms of obstacles which are
not automatically erased with regional integration and the elimination of tariff and non-tariff barriers. As brought for-
ward by Capello et al. (2018), the multifaceted nature of borders is not new; it has however essentially been consid-
ered separately by different streams of scientific literature. With the aim of considering simultaneously the different
facets of borders, these authors propose to decompose the effect of borders by distinguishing between physical,
institutional and cultural obstacles (Capello et al., 2018). Their empirical analysis shows that different types of bar-
riers create obstacles to different growth assets in the borderlands. Sohn and Licheron (2018) also engage in the
decomposition of border effects on the performance of metropolitan areas in Europe. But rather than restricting
themselves to a vision of borders as a constraint on the development of border cities and regions, they consider the
ambivalent character of borders and distinguish between factors that are likely to have a negative impact from fac-
tors that may induce positive effects. In so doing, they show that while cultural differences (i.e., languages) have neg-
ative effects on the level of metropolitan functions (especially economic activities), economic differentials have
positive effects.
      Based on the above considerations, we expect that the presence of a border limits interactions due to barrier
effects (physical, institutional or cultural). This results in a reduction of the opportunities for larger border cities to
borrow size from smaller cities located across the border. The following hypothesis stems from these considerations:


        Hypothesis 4. Larger border cities benefit less from being located close to smaller cities across the
        border in comparison to a domestic setting (H4).


      Concerning the shadow effect expected to hamper the performance of smaller cities located near larger ones
(see H2), one particular moderating effect of borders can be envisaged. The functions of small border cities may be
protected from shadow effects thanks to the border. Such a protection effect provided by borders is linked to terri-
torial sovereignty and the fact that some rationalizing processes to avoid duplication of functions is absent given that
the cities belong to different decision-making frameworks that remain largely national. For instance, these different
political decision-making processes may have led to the establishment of universities in cities on both sides of the
border while in a domestic context this would not have been rational. From these considerations, the following
hypothesis is considered:


        Hypothesis 5. Smaller border cities are less impacted by shadow effects cast by larger cities across
        the border in comparison to a domestic setting (H5).


      Finally, borrowed size effects between cities of similar size are likely to be impacted by the presence of a border
in the same way as was described for larger border cities located near smaller ones; while there is no dominant city
that can cast a shadow, we assume that the border acts as a barrier to integration, making it also more difficult to
borrow size. Hence the hypothesis reads as follows:


        Hypothesis 6. Nearby border cities of more or less equal size display a diminished borrowed size
        effect in comparison to a domestic setting (H6).


      So far, border effects have been considered as uniform over all the European space, which is an assumption
that does not hold against empirical reality. Indeed, European integration is a multidimensional process which
does not apply uniformly to all Member States. Some intra-European (EU) borders have a greater degree of open-
ness than others thanks to different integration trajectories. To further complicate the situation, some EU neigh-
bouring states (such as EFTA member countries) have negotiated specific agreements to lift certain border
barriers. Thus, Switzerland negotiated bilateral agreements with the EU in the early 2000s, which opened up its
borders to a large extent. Other neighbouring states do not have the same border regime and their borders with
SOHN ET AL.                                                                                                             423



EU states are still strictly controlled. For these reasons, we introduce a distinction between various stages of bor-
der opening.
    For controlled borders (such as EU external borders), it seems reasonable to think that the existence of border
obstacles is likely to limit cross-border city interactions and therefore their effects on the performance of border cit-
ies. This limitation operates for the two interaction effects highlighted beforehand but not for the same reasons. On
the one hand, the activities of small border cities are protected from shadow effects (i.e., the competition from larger
cities) thanks to the persistence of border barriers. On the other hand, the border acts as an obstacle that prevents
the larger border city to take advantage of nearby smaller cities (or cities of similar size). These statements underlie
the following hypothesis:


       Hypothesis 7. Border cities separated by a controlled border do not experience significant interaction
       effects (neither agglomeration shadow nor borrowed size) (H7).


    In the situation of open borders (such as EU internal borders), the protection leading to the possible replication
of certain functions on both side of the border is expected to decrease. In the same way, the obstacles induced by
borders are also expected to diminish. Yet, as discussed above, these border effects tend to evolve gradually over
time. In the context of the European integration, the opening of borders is a multidimensional and gradual process.
Some borders have been open for several decades (such as between early member states of the EU, etc.) whereas
others have opened only recently (such as recently integrated EU states). For these reasons, we expect the duration
of opening of borders to be an important moderating factor. Hence the following hypothesis:


       Hypothesis 8. The longer the duration of opening of the border, the stronger the borrowed size
       effects and the agglomeration shadow effects indicated in H4, H5, and H6 (H8).


    Finally, in the foregoing reflections, it was considered that borders exert the same effect over all the metropoli-
tan functions. Yet, we have shown in the literature review that borders may exert differentiated effects due to their
multidimensional nature (Sohn & Licheron, 2018). Without trying to break down the border effects because it goes
beyond the scope of this research, we propose instead to analyse the effects of borders on different types of metro-
politan functions and therefore to consider different types of spheres of influence. Insofar as our dependent variable
is a composite variable, it is possible to distinguish market-driven functions and public-driven functions. The rationale
for making that distinction is that market-driven functions are based on the support-base of the entire cross-border
functional region. Hence, their spatial distribution should follow a more rational pattern, that is, the disturbances pro-
voked by the border (either barrier effect or protection effect) should be low. For public-driven functions, we expect
the opposite. First, the presence of linguistic, cultural or institutional obstacles is expected to limit the attractiveness
of certain public activities for people from the other side of the border (e.g., cultural shows held in another language,
sporting events that stimulate feelings of local or national belonging). Second, the impact of territorial sovereignty
and national decision frameworks is expected to protect certain public activities from cross-border competition.
Hence a stronger border protection effect for public-driven functions than for market-driven ones is anticipated. To
that, one can add that public authorities may support public amenities and services in border cities out of a desire to
awe and impress by transforming them into showcases for the country or in order to develop a strong sense of terri-
torial belonging and national identity. This explains why there are sometimes duplications in public amenities on both
sides of a border (each side wants and has its own stadium, theatre or university). The more rational spatial distribu-
tion of market-driven functions induced by cross-border integration is thus less likely to happen for public-driven
functions. Therefore, our last hypothesis reads:


       Hypothesis 9. The moderating effects of borders (barrier and protection effects) are stronger for
       public-driven functions than for market-driven functions (H9).
424                                                                                                               SOHN ET AL.



3     |       EMPIRICAL STRATEGY AND DATA

3.1       |    Empirical strategy

The empirical strategy is based on the deployment in three stages of a spatial autoregressive model (SAR) in order to
take into account the effects of having nearby cities as well as the moderation effects of borders. First, we determine
the effects of borrowed size and agglomeration shadow without considering the presence of borders using the fol-
lowing equation:
                                                     XK               XK
                                             Y ¼αþ          X γ þ
                                                         k¼1 k k             k¼1
                                                                                   Wk X k δk þ ε,                        ð1Þ


Y                    the dependent variable, i.e. the index of metropolitan functions;
α                    a constant term;
Xk                   a vector of K explaining variables measured at the city level;
PK
    k¼1 W k X k δk   the effect of neighbouring cities, with W k a spatial weight matrix to control for the degree to which a
                     city is influenced by its neighbouring cities;


      In a second stage, we introduce a distinction between being in the sphere of influence of neighbouring cities that
are located in the same country (domestic effect) and being in the sphere of influence of neighbouring cities across
the border (cross-border effect). The second equation reads therefore as follows:

                                                 XK            XK
                                        Y ¼αþ          X γ þ
                                                    k¼1 k k           k¼1
                                                                            W D Xk δk þ W B Bϑ þ ε,                      ð2Þ


Y                    the dependent variable, i.e. the index of metropolitan functions;
α                    a constant term;
Xk                   a vector of K explaining variables measured at the city level;
PK
    k¼1 W D X k δk the domestic effect;
W B Bϑ               the cross-border effect, with B a dummy variable indicating border cities.


      The domestic effect of neighbouring cities relies on a truncated spatial weight matrix W D where only the poten-
tial influence of cities located in the same country is taken into account. The influences of cities belonging to differ-
ent countries are set to 0 for this part of the analysis. Regarding the cross-border effect of neighbouring cities, we
use a truncated spatial weight matrix W B where only the potential influence of border cities located in different
countries is taken into consideration. In that case, the influences of cities belonging to a same country are set to 0.
      In a third stage, we mobilize Equation 2 (including domestic and cross-border influences) but introduce two spe-
cific dependent variables, namely market-driven functions and public-driven functions. The definition of our depen-
dent variables is presented in the next subsection.



3.2       |    Measuring urban performance: Metropolitan functions of European cities

In this paper, we adopt a functional perspective on urban performance by examining the presence of metropolitan
functions in European cities. The database mobilized was created by the German Federal Spatial Planning Agency in
2010 (BBSR, 2011), and further elaborated by us. The metropolitan functions were obtained at the scale of the
municipalities (LAU 2) for the entire European continent. Since cities can be composed of multiple small jurisdictions,
and we want to assess the functional performance of cities, the data was aggregated at the morphological urban area
(MUA) scale as defined by ESPON (IGEAT, 2007). MUAs have been identified for 29 European countries and
SOHN ET AL.                                                                                                             425



correspond to groupings of municipalities that have at least 20,000 inhabitants.1 While we address MUAs, in this
paper we use the term “cities” for simplicity. The study area covers the EU 27 countries plus Norway and
Switzerland, making a total of 1,920 cities.
      The ad hoc composite index of metropolitan functions used in this paper builds on 28 variables. It covers the
domains of “economy” (including the presence of headquarters of top-500 firms, advanced producer services, banks and
trade fairs), “science” (including top-500 universities, scientific associations and international congresses), “transport”
(including air and rail passenger transport, maritime goods transport and data traffic) and “culture and sports” (including
theatres, opera houses, music events, galleries, sports stadiums and important sporting events). Data for the various
metropolitan functions was gathered during the period from 2003 to 2009, with 2006 as the main year of reference.
The values of the index range from 0 (the absence of metropolitan functions) to 100 (maximum). In order to uncover
whether the effects of borders are specific to certain functions, we make a distinction between “market-driven
functions” (pertaining to the domains “economy” and “transport” and mainly controlled by private actors) and “public-
driven functions” (pertaining to the domain “science” and cultural activities controlled by public stakeholders). In the
end, we use three dependent variables: all metropolitan functions, market-driven functions and public-driven functions.



3.3      |     Defining spheres of influence: the gravity equation

Measuring actual region-based urban interactions represents a methodological and data challenge. Given that our
dependent variable is a composite index of metropolitan functions, the interaction effects we would be interested in
embrace a broad spectrum of phenomena and are composed of multiple flows and various networks (material and
immaterial). Such composite flow data is not readily available, and the construction of an ad hoc variable from partic-
ular flow observations (e.g., trade, commuters, telephone communications, business corporations and scientific col-
laborations) involves insurmountable constraints due to the granularity of our observations (1,920 cities) and the
geographical coverage of the study (29 European countries). The best data available in some cases appears to be
commuting across borders. Unfortunately, such data on cross-border workers are not available across Europe and at
the required geographical granularity for this research (Van der Valk, 2018).
      Given the absence of true interaction data, other studies (e.g., Meijers & Burger, 2017) have simply assumed that
cities that are part of the same pre-defined functional or administrative region are integrated, without considering
the degree of interaction between them. However, we may assume that there is more interaction with a close-by
large city than with a smaller city at greater distance. Here, we intend to develop a more precise proxy of the degree
of potential interaction between cities. In determining this degree, we employ a spatial interaction model that creates
a value for the potential interaction between a pair of cities by taking their sizes and spatial separation into account.
Specifically, potential interactions are computed according to the following equation:

                                                                   Pi  Pj
                                                 Interaction ij ¼ k  α ,                                              ð3Þ
                                                                     Dij

where Pi is the population of the city i, Pj is the population of the city j, k is a proportionality constant related to the
rate of the event, Dij the Euclidian distance between the two locations i and j, and α the distance attenuation
coefficient.
      With this classic gravity equation, we assume that the potential interaction between two cities is a function of
their size (population) weighted by their level of separation (geographical distance). In other words, the interactions
estimated do not correspond to specific flows, but reflect a general potential. The constant is defined as 1, since we
do not consider a specific timespan. The coefficient of friction of distance varies according to the type of flows or
activities considered, as well as other factors such as the range of distance. Its calibration requires observed data and
the selection of the best fitting distance-decay function (De Vries et al., 2009). Given the lack of flow data, we rely
on existing studies that have sought to empirically define the coefficient of friction of distance. According to Sun
426                                                                                                                SOHN ET AL.



et al. (2019), the coefficient varies between 1 and 3 depending on the networks considered. Based on the works of
Lambiotte et al. (2008), who used mobile phone communications, Krings et al. (2009), who modelled telecommunica-
tion flows in Belgium, and Jung et al. (2008), who investigated traffic flows on Korean highways, we set the coeffi-
cient at 2. Robustness checks using alternative specifications (coefficients of 1.5 and 2.5) have been performed to
verify the validity of this somewhat arbitrary choice. Insofar as the focus of the research is on the effects of neigh-
bouring cities at the regional scale, we excluded from the analysis any potential interactions exceeding 75 km. This
distance threshold was defined empirically by considering the spatial structure of polycentric urban regions such as
those defined by Meijers and Burger (2017). Out of 1,920 cities, only 75 do not have any potential interactions with
neighbouring cities. The value of total potential interactions per city ranges from 0 for these 75 cities to 26,075
(Mannheim, Germany). The mean value is 293.27.
      In order to test our hypotheses relating to borrowed size and agglomeration shadow effects, we consider sepa-
rately the relationships of a city with cities that are either smaller (i.e., potential interactions with all other cities hav-
ing a number of inhabitants smaller than 50% of the studied city's population), similar-sized (i.e., potential
interactions with all other cities having a number of inhabitants larger than 50% but smaller than 200% of the studied
city's population) or larger (i.e., potential interactions with all other cities having a number of inhabitants larger than
200% of the studied city's population).



3.4      |   Border variables

The identification of the moderating impact of borders is based on the comparison of borrowing and shadowing effects
between cities in the same country, and between border cities on both sides of a border. In order to implement such a
distinction, we have defined what we considered to be a border city. Based on previous research that has identified
border cities across Europe (Sohn, 2017; see also Heider, 2019), we have used a travel time by car of 45 minutes to the
nearest border as a threshold. Such a measure reflects real accessibility at the border more realistically than bird-eye
distance measurements and 45 minutes travel distance reflects the maximum generally accepted commuting and daily
mobility distance (ESPON, 2012). Following that criteria, some 355 out of the 1,920 cities are considered as border cities.
      Two additional border-related variables are used in order to test moderating effects. The first variable is dis-
tinguishing controlled borders from open borders. Controlled borders refer to the external borders of the EU in 2006
(with the exclusion of borders between EU countries and EFTA countries due to the existence of specific agree-
ments). Open borders refer to the EU's internal borders (and common borders with EFTA countries). The second
border-related variable is considering the duration of opening of borders. This variable describes the historical length
of the relative opening of borders within the context of European integration. The date of accession of countries to
the EU was considered to determine the duration of the opening of each border dyad. For EFTA countries, the dates
of relevant agreements with the EU were considered. This categorical variable ranges from still controlled, to open
less than 10 years, between 10 and 20 years, and more than 20 years.



3.5      |   Control variables

The last set of variables used in this research is composed of nine control variables that capture the characteristics of
cities and countries.2 Based on agglomeration economies literature (see notably Fujita & Thisse, 2013), the variables
Population (number of inhabitants per city in 2006) and Population growth (evolution between 2001 and 2011) are
expected to have a positive effect on metropolitan performance. Capital cities and cities that are the seat of
Supranational organizations (i.e., seats of EU institutions, UN offices or NGOs) are also expected to have a positive
impact, since they tend to concentrate decision-making power and talent, and attract capital, labour and knowledge
flows (Cardoso & Meijers, 2016; Dijkstra et al., 2013). Functional diversity relies on Rodgers’ diversification index using
SOHN ET AL.                                                                                                                427



the four domains of metropolitan functions (i.e., economy, science, transport, culture and sports) and is expected to have
a positive impact on agglomeration economies (Jacobs, 1969). Global connectivity measures the embeddedness of cities
in global networks of advanced producer services (APS), based on the Globalization and World Cities research network
(GaWC) (Taylor, 2000). This network variable differs from the economic variables that make up the index of metropoli-
tan functions insofar as it corresponds to the sum of links that a city maintains with all the others on the basis of the
co-location of APS firms. A high global connectivity is considered an advantage for fostering metropolitan performance
(McCann & Acs, 2011). At the country level, it is assumed that federal political systems (Federal state) offer more flexibil-
ity for cities to develop competitiveness strategies compared with centralized countries (Trippl, 2010). Last, Country
dummies are used to control for idiosyncratic characteristics linked to the institutional trajectory of countries.



4      |       E S T I M A T I O N R E S U LT S

4.1        |     Borrowed size and agglomeration shadow among European cities

The estimation of Equation 1 constitutes our baseline model where we consider the effect of potential interactions
between cities based on the three hypotheses presented in subsection 2.1.
      The results of the baseline model (model 1) are shown in Table 1. With regards to the city-level and country-
level control variables, the results are as expected. The population of the city, the growth of the population, being
the host of supranational organizations, the global connectivity and the greater diversity of functions have positive
and significant effects on the metropolitan performance.
      In general, with regards to the relationships between neighbouring cities, there is no significant effect on the
presence of metropolitan functions from having nearby smaller cities. This means that larger cities do not benefit

TABLE 1             Baseline SAR model

                                                                                                      (1)
    Control variables
    City population                                                                                     0.0052 (0.0011)***
    Population growth                                                                                   1.1814 (0.6232)*
    Capital city                                                                                      0.0009 (0.0008)
    Supranational organizations                                                                         0.2234 (0.1015)**
    Global connectivity                                                                                14.1278 (3.3163)***
    Federal State                                                                                     0.2851 (0.1842)
    Functional diversity                                                                                0.4281 (0.1069)***
    Potential interaction effects
    Smaller neighbouring city population                                                                0.0009 (0.0012)
    Similar size neighbouring city population                                                           0.0494 (0.0224)**
    Larger neighbouring city population                                                               0.3738 (0.1590)**
    Constant                                                                                          1.3629 (0.0602)***
    Country dummies                                                                                          YES
                2
    Pseudo R                                                                                             0.4780
    Nb. Observations                                                                                        1920

Notes: Standard errors between brackets.
***denotes significance at the 1% level,
**significance at 5%,
*significance at 10%.
428                                                                                                          SOHN ET AL.



from being close to smaller ones and H1 is therefore not confirmed. However, being located close to a larger city
results in a negative and significant effect. Larger cities cast an agglomeration shadow over smaller ones and H2 is
therefore confirmed. Finally, there is a positive and significant effect linked to having cities of similar size in your
sphere of influence. This leads to having more metropolitan functions, and this borrowing of size seems to benefit all
cities of equal size within polycentric urban regions, thus confirming H3.



4.2     |    The moderating effect of borders

In a second step, we test the moderating effect of borders using Equation 2. Two models are presented in order to
test the hypotheses relating to varying border conditions. Model 2 introduces a distinction between having neigh-
bouring cities in the same country and having neighbouring cities across the border. Model 3 estimates the modera-
tion effects exerted by the duration of opening of the border. The results of model 2 and model 3 are shown in
Table 2. For both models, it is worth noting that no significant changes of the parameter estimations for the control
variables and the results for having neighbouring cities located in the same country occur in comparison to model 1.
      In model 2, the distinction between domestic and cross-border patterns of borrowing and shadowing becomes
clear. We do not find any significant effect for larger cities being located close to smaller ones in a domestic or a
cross-border context. H4 is therefore not confirmed. As far as the influence exerted by a larger city over a smaller
one is concerned, the presence of a border is introducing a notable change. Whereas we find an agglomeration
shadow effect in domestic settings, having a larger neighbouring city across the border does not lead to shadow
effects. In fact, smaller border cities even manage to profit from being located close to larger cities on the other side
of the border. It seems that borders protect smaller cities from the agglomeration shadow normally cast by larger
neighbouring cities in a domestic setting. H5 is verified, even to such an extent that the assumed agglomeration
shadow is not simply less present, but even completely absent and instead, smaller cities manage to borrow size from
a larger city across the border. As for similar-sized cities, borrowing size effects in a cross-border polycentric urban
region appear stronger and more significant than in a domestic setting. This result does not verify the assumption
made in H6 about the barrier effect induced by the border. Finally, the fact that the estimations provided by model
2 do not allow us to confirm our hypotheses tends to show that the moderation effects of borders are more complex
and that other factors come into consideration.
      Model 3 allows to test whether the status of borders (controlled vs. open) and the duration of opening of bor-
ders play a moderating role on the pattern of borrowing and shadowing in a cross-border setting. As could be
expected, the presence of metropolitan functions in a border city is not affected by being located close to smaller,
similar-sized or larger cross-border cities when borders are controlled. This result verifies H7. However, the potential
to borrow size from similar-sized or larger neighbouring cities located across the border increases with the duration
of the opening of the border. More specifically, we find a positive and significant effect for borders that have been
opened up between 10 and 20 years and a stronger effect for borders that have been opened for more than
20 years. These results are in line with H8. However, having smaller cities on the other side of the border does not
impact the performance of a city, and this does not change with the duration of opening of the border. In that regard,
H8 is therefore not fully confirmed, as the moderating effect of the duration of opening of borders is conditional on
the size class of the neighbouring border cities.



4.3     |    The effects of borders on market-driven and public-driven metropolitan functions

In the last step, we test whether the moderating effects of borders differ depending on the type of metropolitan
functions considered. In model 4, the dependent variable is composed of market-driven functions, whereas in model
5, the dependent variable is constituted by public-driven functions. The estimation results are presented in Table 3.
SOHN ET AL.                                                                                                     429



TABLE 2          SAR models with domestic and cross-border interaction effects

                                                                      (2)                   (3)
                                                                      Domestic and          Moderation effect
                                                                      cross-border          of duration of
                                                                      interaction           opening of borders
  Control variables
  City population                                                      0.0051 (0.0110)***    0.0053 (0.0120)***
  Population growth                                                    1.1816 (0.6231)*      1.2251 (0.6240)*
  Capital city                                                        0.0007 (0.0008)      0.0007 (0.0011)
  Supranational organizations                                          0.2116 (0.1012)**     0.2183 (0.1023)**
  Global connectivity                                                 14.5120 (3.2815)***   14.1223 (3.1541)***
  Federal State                                                       0.3521 (0.2032)      0.3612 (0.2451)
  Functional diversity                                                 0.4219 (0.1032)***    0.4251 (0.1070)***
  Potential domestic interaction effects
  Smaller neighbouring city population                                 0.0012 (0.0015)       0.0008 (0.0021)
  Similar size neighbouring city population                            0.0512 (0.0269)*      0.0446 (0.0228)*
  Larger neighbouring city population                                 0.4316 (0.1269)***   0.4304 (0.1261)**
  Potential cross-border interaction effects
  Smaller neighbouring city population                                 0.0012 (0.0012)
  Similar size neighbouring city population                            0.0815 (0.0354)**
  Larger neighbouring city population                                  0.0326 (0.0135)**
  Potential cross-border interaction effects * Controlled borders
  Smaller neighbouring city population                                                      0.0005 (0.0022)
  Similar size neighbouring city population                                                 0.0014 (0.0035)
  Larger neighbouring city population                                                       0.0004 (0.0018)
  Potential cross-border interaction effects *
    Borders open less than 10 years
  Smaller neighbouring city population                                                       0.0021 (0.0024)
  Similar size neighbouring city population                                                  0.0441 (0.0320)
  Larger neighbouring city population                                                        0.0261 (0.0137)*
  Potential cross-border interaction effects *
    Borders open between 10 and 20 years
  Smaller neighbouring city population                                                       0.0018 (0.0024)
  Similar size neighbouring city population                                                  0.0801 (0.0381)**
  Larger neighbouring city population                                                        0.0274 (0.0140)*
  Potential cross-border interaction effects *
    Borders open more than 20 years
  Smaller neighbouring city population                                                       0.0051 (0.0031)
  Similar size neighbouring city population                                                  0.1261 (0.0536)**
  Larger neighbouring city population                                                        0.0284 (0.0149)*
  Constant                                                            1.3613 (0.0618)***   1.3511 (0.0634)***
  Country dummies                                                          YES                   YES
  Pseudo R2                                                             0.4828                0.4964
  Nb. Observations                                                       1920                  1920
430                                                                                                           SOHN ET AL.



Notes: Standard errors between brackets.
***denotes significance at the 1% level,
**significance at 5%,
*significance at 10%.



TABLE 3          SAR models with market-driven functions and public-driven functions as dependent variables

                                                    (4)                                  (5)
                                                    Market-driven functions only         Public-driven functions only
  Control variables
  City population                                     0.0053 (0.0011)***                   0.0052 (0.0011)***
  Population growth                                   1.2635 (0.6640)*                     1.2252 (0.5574)**
  Capital city                                      0.0008 (0.0010)                     0.0006 (0.0010)
  Supranational organizations                         0.2186 (0.1015)**                    0.2018 (0.0990)**
  Global connectivity                                14.1524 (3.2389)***                 14.7364 (3.0241)***
  Federal State                                     0.4241 (0.2138)                     0.3705 (0.2215)
  Functional diversity                                0.4071 (0.1183)***                   0.4230 (0.0901)***
  Potential domestic interaction effects
  Smaller neighbouring city population                0.0006 (0.0005)                      0.0007 (0.0006)
  Similar size neighbouring city population           0.0812 (0.0426)*                     0.0203 (0.0415)
  Larger neighbouring city population               0.7321 (0.2434)***                  0.3235 (0.1468)**
  Potential cross-border interaction effects
  Smaller Cross-border city pop                       0.0026 (0.0035)                      0.0022 (0.0042)
  Similar size neighbouring city population           0.1022 (0.0534)*                     0.0510 (0.0269)*
  Larger neighbouring city population                 0.0302 (0.0162)*                     0.0105 (0.0180)
  Constant                                          1.5906 (0.0719)***                  1.3014 (0.0702)***
  Country dummies                                         YES                                  YES
  Pseudo R2                                            0.5187                              0.4842
  Nb. Observations                                      1920                                 1920

Notes: Standard errors between brackets.
***denotes significance at the 1% level,
**significance at 5%,
*significance at 10%.




As for the previous models, we do not observe any significant changes of the parameter estimations for the control
variables.
      Concerning domestic neighbouring cities, the agglomeration shadow cast by larger cities over smaller ones is
stronger and more significant for market-driven functions than public-driven functions. As for borrowed size effects
between cities of relatively similar size, there is a positive and significant effect only for market-driven functions.
When we consider the results for cross-border patterns, we find that the positive and significant effect for smaller
cities that are close to larger ones located on the other side of a border is only present for market-driven functions
and not for public-driven ones. As for the borrowed size effect between cities of relatively similar size, the positive
effect is present for both types of functions, but its value is stronger for market-driven functions in comparison with
public-driven functions. In other words, public-driven functions are more sensitive to the barrier effects and the pro-
tection effects induced by borders than market-driven functions. These results are consistent with H9.
SOHN ET AL.                                                                                                           431



4.4       |     Robustness checks

The above presented estimation results have been examined for their robustness according to different assumptions
that may be potentially arbitrary. The results of additional robustness tests are not presented in the paper but are
available in the Appendix. The first assumption refers to the selection criteria of border cities. We have used travel
distance by car based on data from 2008 (ESPON, 2012). It might be the case that, in some border regions, new
roads have been built quite recently (e.g., after the enlargement phase of 2004), leaving little time for these accessi-
bility changes to be reflected in the level of functions present in the cities concerned in 2006. To overcome this
potential shortcoming, a definition of border cities based on a distance of 25 km to the nearest borders, as the crow
flies, has been used in order to obtain a group that is more robust against potential changes in the road network. No
significant changes in the estimations have been observed (see Table A2).
      The second potentially arbitrary assumption that we have checked concerns the coefficient of friction of dis-
tance for the gravity equation. Based on existing literature, we have set the coefficient at 2. Two alternative specifi-
cations of the gravity equation were used to perform robustness checks (α = 1.5 and α = 2.5) and no significant
changes in the parameter estimates were observed (see Table A3).
      The third assumption that has been subject to a robustness test is related to our definition of the size of cities
for the identification of borrowed size and agglomeration shadow effects. In order to test if some results could be
driven by cities of specific sizes, we have run separate models based on sub-samples of small, medium-sized and
large cities (in absolute terms). These new specifications (see Table A4) show that the borrowed size effect between
border cities of similar sizes concerns medium-sized cities that have between 100,000 and 250,000 inhabitants as
well as, albeit to a lesser degree, those that have more than 250,000 inhabitants (at MUA level). The positive effect
stemming from having a larger city across the border concerns essentially medium-sized cities. For both the patterns
of borrowing and shadowing, no significant changes in the estimations were observed.



5     |       C O N CL U S I O N A ND D I S C U S S I O N

The process of integration between cities on a variety of spatial scales, not least the regional scale, is recognized as
an important driver of urban growth and performance (Cardoso & Meijers, 2021). Yet, the territorial anchoring of cit-
ies, and in particular the disrupting role of borders in this process, has largely been left untouched in debates on such
urban network externalities. It is precisely this knowledge gap that this paper tries to fill by exploring how the pres-
ence of national borders moderates the patterns of borrowed size and agglomeration shadows that result from
increased interaction between neighbouring cities.
      We found a remarkable impact of borders on the geography of borrowing and shadowing in cross-border
regions. In line with most previous research, and considering just such patterns of borrowing and shadowing
between cities in a domestic setting, we found that having a larger neighbouring city negatively impacts the presence
of metropolitan functions in a city (because that place is in an agglomeration shadow), whereas having more or less
similar-sized neighbouring cities generally benefits all cities as they borrow size from each other. We consider these
patterns to be the normal regularities of a settlement system, at least in Europe.
      However, we found that the patterns resulting from having neighbouring cities across borders are different.
Larger cities do not cast their shadow across the border: borders protect smaller cities from this competition effect
and as a result they are not “emptied” of their functions as we see so often in domestic settings. The opposite is true,
as those smaller cities are even able to profit from having a larger city across the border as this allows it to borrow
size in the sense of expanding the market base for their urban functions. This greater market access, in combination
with a protective role of borders relating to cultural and institutional differences and the persistence of national deci-
sion frameworks on the location of metropolitan functions (rather than a rationalizing process at the scale of cross-
border regions) enables smaller border cities to gain from their territorial anchoring near a border and having larger
432                                                                                                                SOHN ET AL.



neighbouring cities across that border. These neighbouring cities do not necessarily have to be larger; it is also
advantageous when they are of more or less equal size. Instead of an anticipated weaker positive effect associated
with their integration, we actually found that they manage to borrow more size from each other than in a polycentric
urban region located in a domestic setting. Apparently the protective role of borders is stronger than their
barrier role.
      Obviously, the picture is a bit more complex and we need to take into account the duration of opening of a bor-
der and the type of metropolitan functions (we discerned market-driven and public-driven functions). For instance,
cities constituting a cross-border polycentric urban region host more metropolitan functions when borders have
been open for a longer time, and the positive borrowed size effect concerns market-driven metropolitan functions
more than public-driven metropolitan functions.
      The bigger picture is that borders moderate the normal regularities of a settlement system, and that they actually
lead to more borrowed size over time, while agglomeration shadows remain absent. Future research could be
focused more on case studies of cross-border metropolitan regions exploring our general patterns in more detail, and
on disentangling borders into different obstacles in order to assess their effects separately (see Capello et al., 2018).
While we have focused on the presence of metropolitan functions as our measure of performance of a city, future
research could also concentrate on different performance measures to explore whether similar results are obtained.
Productivity, growth in jobs and population are the traditional, aggregate options with the added advantage that
trends over time can be more easily explored, but these could be complemented with indicators capturing micro-
level outcomes for firms and households.
      Finally, our results can be interpreted as a clear indication that further European integration, and cross-border
metropolitan integration in particular, is beneficial for border cities. Stakeholders in border cities and regions could
be much more aware of their unique advantages and develop strategies to exploit these. The new and positive light
that our analysis sheds on border cities suggests that it is time for those often largely overlooked border cities to
step out of the shadows.


ORCID
Christophe Sohn       https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2448-288X
Julien Licheron      https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6181-3561
Evert Meijers      https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0031-6828


ENDNOTES
1
    A detailed list of MUAs per country can be found in the final report of ESPON project 1.4.3. Study on Urban Functions
    (IGEAT, 2007).
2
    Detailed information about the control variables is available in the appendix (Table A1).



RE FE R ENC E S
Alonso, W. (1973). Urban zero population growth. Daedalus, 102, 191–206. https://www.jstor.org/stable/20024174
Anderson, J., & van Wincoop, E. (2003). Gravity with gravitas: A solution to the border puzzle. American Economic Review,
    93, 170–192. https://doi.org/10.1257/000282803321455214
Basboga, K. (2020). The role of open borders and cross-border cooperation in regional growth across Europe. Regional Stud-
    ies, Regional Science, 7, 532–549. https://doi.org/10.1080/21681376.2020.1842800
BBSR. (2011). Metropolitan areas in Europe. Federal Institute for Research on Building, Urban Affairs and Spatial Develop-
    ment (BBSR).
Boix, R., & Trullén, J. (2007). Knowledge, networks of cities and growth in regional urban systems. Papers in Regional Science,
    86, 551–574. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1435-5957.2007.00139.x
Brakman, S., Garretsen, H., Van Marrewijk, C., & Oumer, A. (2012). The border population effects of EU integration. Journal
    of Regional Science, 52, 40–59. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9787.2011.00752.x
Brülhart, M. (2011). The spatial effects of trade openness: A survey. Review of World Economics, 147, 59–83. https://doi.
    org/10.1007/s10290-010-0083-5
SOHN ET AL.                                                                                                                  433



Brülhart, M., Crozet, M., & Koenig, P. (2004). Enlargement and the EU periphery: The impact of changing market potential.
    The World Economy, 27, 853–875. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9701.2004.00632.x
Camagni, R. (1993). From city hierarchy to city network: Reflections about an emerging paradigm. In T. R. Lakshmanan &
    P. Nijkamp (Eds.), Structure and change in the space economy. Springer.
Camagni, R., Capello, R., & Caragliu, A. (2019). Measuring the impact of legal and administrative international barriers on
    regional growth. Regional Science Policy & Practice, 11, 345–366. https://doi.org/10.1111/rsp3.12195
Capello, R. (2000). The city network paradigm: measuring urban network externalities. Urban Studies, 37, 1925–1945.
    https://doi.org/10.1080/713707232
Capello, R., Caragliu, A., & Fratesi, U. (2018). Breaking down the border: Physical, institutional and cultural obstacles. Eco-
    nomic Geography, 94, 485–513. https://doi.org/10.1080/00130095.2018.1444988
Capello, R., & Rietveld, P. (1998). The concept of network synergy in economic theory: policy implications. In P. Nijkamp &
    H. Priemus (Eds.), Networks in Europe. Concepts, analysis and policies. Edward Elgar.
Cardoso, R. V., & Meijers, E. J. (2016). Contrasts between first-tier and second-tier cities in Europe: a functional perspective.
    European Planning Studies, 24, 996–1015. https://doi.org/10.1080/09654313.2015.1120708
Cardoso, R. V., & Meijers, E. J. (2021). Metropolisation: The winding road toward the Citification of the Region. Urban Geog-
    raphy, 42, 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1080/02723638.2020.1828558
Christaller, W. (1966). Central places in southern Germany. Prentice-Hall.
De Vries, J. J., Nijkamp, P., & Rietveld, P. (2009). Exponential or power distance-decay for commuting? An alternative speci-
    fication. Environment and Planning a: Economy and Space, 41, 461–480. https://doi.org/10.1068/a39369
Derudder, B. (2021). Network analysis of ‘urban systems’: Potential, challenges, and pitfalls. Tijdschrift voor Economische en
    Sociale Geografie, 112, 404–420. https://doi.org/10.1111/tesg.12392
Dijkstra, L., Garcilazo, E., & McCann, P. (2013). The economic performance of European cities and city regions: Myths and
    realities. European Planning Studies, 21, 334–354. https://doi.org/10.1080/09654313.2012.716245
EC. (2021). List of EU countries by membership date provided by the European Commission. http://ec.europa.eu/index_en.htm
ESPON. (2012) Geographic specificities and development potentials in Europe (GEOSPECS). Final Report. Luxembourg
ESPON. (2016). Morphological Urban Areas database. Retrieved from ESPON: http://database.espon.eu
EUROSTAT. (2020) Data browser. Population on 1 January by broad age group, sex and other typologies. Retrieved from
    https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/URT_PJANAGGR3__custom_1016044/default/table?lang=en
Forum of Federations. (2015). List of federal countries provided by the Global Network on Federalism and Devolved Governance:
    http://www.forumfed.org/
Fujita, M., & Thisse, J.-F. (2013). Economics of agglomeration: Cities, industrial location, and regional growth (2nd ed.).
    Cambridge University Press.
Gouveia, S., Correia, L., & Martins, P. (2020). European integration and its effects on population in border and peripheral
    regions. Eastern Journal of European Studies, 11, 8–27.
Hanson, G. H. (1996). Economic integration, intra-industry trade, and frontier regions. European Economic Review, 40,
    941–949. https://doi.org/10.1016/0014-2921(95)00103-4
Hanson, G. H. (2001). US–Mexico integration and regional economies: evidence from border-city pairs. Journal of Urban Eco-
    nomics, 50, 259–287. https://doi.org/10.1006/juec.2001.2217
Heider, B. (2019). The impact of EU Eastern enlargement on urban growth and decline: New insights from Germany's East-
    ern border. Papers in Regional Science, 98, 1443–1468. https://doi.org/10.1111/pirs.12407
IGEAT. (2007). Study on urban functions 1.4.3. ESPON.
Jacobs, J. (1969). The economy of cities. Vintage.
Johansson, B., & Quigley, J. M. (2004). Agglomeration and networks in spatial economics. Papers in Regional Science, 83,
    165–176. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10110-003-0181-z
Jung, W.-S., Wang, F., & Stanley, H. E. (2008). Gravity model in the Korean highway. EPL (Europhysics Letters), 81, 48005.
    https://doi.org/10.1209/0295-5075/81/48005
Krings, G., Calabrese, F., Ratti, C., & Blondel, V. D. (2009). Urban gravity: A model for intercity telecommunication flows.
    Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, 2009, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-5468/2009/07/
    L07003
Lafourcade, M., & Paluzie, E. (2011). European integration, foreign direct investment (FDI), and the geography of French
    trade. Regional Studies, 45, 419–439. https://doi.org/10.1080/00343401003713357
Lambiotte, R., Blondel, V. D., de Kerchove, C., Huens, E., Prieur, C., Smoreda, Z., & van Dooren, P. (2008). Geographical dis-
    persal of mobile communication networks. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 387, 5317–5325. https://
    doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2008.05.014
Makkonen, T., & Williams, A. M. (2016). Border region studies: The structure of an “offbeat” field of regional studies.
    Regional Studies, Regional Science, 3, 355–367. https://doi.org/10.1080/21681376.2016.1209982
McCallum, J. (1995). National borders matter: Canada-US regional trade patterns. The American Economic Review, 85,
    615–623. https://www.jstor.org/stable/2118191
434                                                                                                                SOHN ET AL.



McCann, P., & Acs, Z. J. (2011). Globalization: Countries, cities and multinationals. Regional Studies, 45, 17–32. https://doi.
    org/10.1080/00343404.2010.505915
Medeiros, E., Ramírez, M. G., Ocskay, G., & Peyrony, J. (2020). Covidfencing effects on cross-border deterritorialism: The
    case of Europe. European Planning Studies, 29, 962–982. https://doi.org/10.1080/09654313.2020.1818185
Meijers, E. (2005). Polycentric urban regions and the quest for synergy: Is a network of cities more than the sum of the
    parts? Urban Studies, 42, 765–781. https://doi.org/10.1080/00420980500060384
Meijers, E., Hoogerbrugge, M., & Cardoso, R. (2018). Beyond polycentricity: Does stronger integration between cities in
    polycentric urban regions improve performance? Tijdschrift voor Economische en Sociale Geografie, 109, 1–21. https://
    doi.org/10.1111/tesg.12292
Meijers, E. J., & Burger, M. J. (2017). Stretching the concept of ‘borrowed size’. Urban Studies, 54, 269–291. https://doi.org/
    10.1177/0042098015597642
Meijers, E. J., Burger, M. J., & Hoogerbrugge, M. M. (2016). Borrowing size in networks of cities: City size, network connec-
    tivity and metropolitan functions in Europe. Papers in Regional Science, 95, 181–198. https://doi.org/10.1111/pirs.
    12181
Niebuhr, A. (2008). The impact of EU enlargement on European border regions. International Journal of Public Policy, 3, 163–
    186. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJPP.2008.019065
Niebuhr, A., & Stiller, S. (2004). Integration effects in border regions: a survey of economic theory and empirical studies.
    Review of Regional Research, 24, 3–21.
Nitsch, V. (2000). National borders and international trade: Evidence from the European Union. Canadian Journal of Econom-
    ics, 33, 1091–1105. https://doi.org/10.1111/0008-4085.00055
Nitsch, V., & Wolf, N. (2013). Tear down this wall: On the persistence of borders in trade. Canadian Journal of Economics, 46,
    154–179. https://doi.org/10.1111/caje.12002
Peris, A., Meijers, E., & Van Ham, M. (2018). The evolution of the systems of cities literature since 1995: Schools of thought
    and their interaction. Networks and Spatial Economics, 18, 533–554. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11067-018-9410-5
Redding, S. J., & Sturm, D. M. (2008). The costs of remoteness: Evidence from German division and reunification. The Ameri-
    can Economic Review, 98, 1766–1797. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.98.5.1766
Rodgers, A. (1957). Some aspects of industrial diversification in the United States. Economic Geography, 33, 16–30. https://
    doi.org/10.2307/142564
Sohn, C. (2017). Cartography of a blind spot: An exploratory analysis of European border cities. Tijdschrift voor Economische
    en Sociale Geografie, 108, 512–518. https://doi.org/10.1111/tesg.12278
Sohn, C., & Licheron, J. (2018). The multiple effects of borders on metropolitan functions in Europe. Regional Studies, 52,
    1512–1524. https://doi.org/10.1080/00343404.2017.1410537
Sohn, C., & Stambolic, N. (2015). The urban development of European border regions: A spatial typology. Europa Regional,
    21, 177–189.
Sun, Q., Wang, S., Zhang, K., Ma, F., Guo, X., & Li, T. (2019). Spatial pattern of urban system based on gravity model and
    whole network analysis in eight urban agglomerations of China. Mathematical Problems in Engineering, 2019, 1–17.
    https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/6509726
Taylor, P. J. (2000). Global network service connectivities for 315 cities in 2000. GaWC. URL: https://www.lboro.ac.uk/gawc/
    datasets/da12.html
Taylor, P. J. (2011). Global urban Aanalysis: A survey of cities in globalization. Routledge.
Trippl, M. (2010). Developing cross-border regional innovation systems: Key factors and challenges. Tijdschrift voor Economi-
    sche en Sociale Geografie, 101, 150–160. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9663.2009.00522.x
Van der Valk, J. (2018). Border region data collection. European Commission.
Van Oort, F., Burger, M., & Raspe, O. (2010). On the economic foundation of the urban network paradigm: Spatial integra-
    tion, functional integration and economic complementarities within the Dutch Randstad. Urban Studies, 47, 725–748.
    https://doi.org/10.1177/0042098009352362
Wolf, N. (2005). Path dependent border effects: The case of Poland's reunification (1918–1939). Explorations in Economic
    History, 42, 414–438. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eeh.2004.10.002




      How to cite this article: Sohn, C., Licheron, J., & Meijers, E. (2022). Border cities: Out of the shadow. Papers
      in Regional Science, 101(2), 417–438. https://doi.org/10.1111/pirs.12653
SOHN ET AL.                                                                                                    435



APPENDIX A



TABLE A1         Definition of variables

  Variable                  Explanation                                        Survey year     Source
  Control variables
  City population MUA       Number of inhabitants of the MUA                   2006            IGEAT, 2007
  Population growth         Evolution of the number of inhabitants between     2001 and 2011   ESPON 2016
                              2001 and 2011 (in %)
  Capital city              National capitals based on the average value of    2008            BBSR, 2011
                             three indicators from the BBSR (i.e., national
                             capital weighted by the number of seats in the
                             Council of Europe, the national population and
                             the national gross domestic product).
  Supranational             Seat of supranational organizations based on the   2008            BBSR, 2011
    organizations             average value of five indicators from the BBSR
                              (i.e., UN offices, EU political centres, EU
                              institutions, international organizations and
                              NGOs)
  Global connectivity       Global connectivity of advanced producer           2000            Taylor, 2000
                              services networks (GaWC dataset 12)
  Federal States            MUA located in a centralized country (0) or in a   2006            Forum of
                             federal country (1)                                                 Federations 2015
  Functional diversity      Rodgers’ diversification index (Rodgers 1957)      2006            BBSR, 2011
  Country dummies           Territorial affiliation of MUAs by country         2006            IGEAT, 2007
  Border variables
  Border city               MUA located less than 45 minutes to the            2006            IGEAT, 2007,
                             nearest border (travel time by car)                                 ESPON, 2012
  Controlled border         External borders of the EU (excluding borders      2006            EC 2021
                              between the EU and EFTA countries)
  Duration of opening       Duration of opening of border dyads based on       2006            EC 2021 + Various
   of borders                the date of accession of European countries to                      sources
                             the EU. For EFTA countries, date of relevant
                             agreements with the EU.
436                                                                                                        SOHN ET AL.



TABLE A2          With border cities defined as being less than 25 km from the nearest border

                                                                               (1)

                                                                               Domestic and cross-border interaction
  City population                                                                0.0053 (0.0013)***
  Population growth                                                              1.1726 (0.6230)*
  Capital city                                                                 0.0007 (0.0009)
  Supranational organizations                                                    0.2131 (0.1011)**
  Global connectivity                                                           14.8241 (3.4115)***
  Federal State                                                                0.3523 (0.2419)
  Functional diversity                                                           0.4219 (0.0915)***
  Potential domestic interaction effects
  Smaller neighbouring city population                                           0.0015 (0.0018)
  Similar size neighbouring city population                                      0.0537 (0.0281)*
  Larger neighbouring city population                                          0.5219 (0.1429)***
  Potential cross-border interaction effects
  Smaller neighbouring city population                                           0.0010 (0.0015)
  Similar size neighbouring city population                                      0.0681 (0.0315)**
  Larger neighbouring city population                                            0.0415 (0.0199)**
  Constant                                                                     1.3591 (0.0694)***
  Country dummies                                                                     YES
             2
  Pseudo R                                                                        0.4825
  Nb. Observations                                                                   1920

Notes: Standard errors between brackets.
***denotes significance at the 1% level,
**significance at 5%,
*significance at 10%.
SOHN ET AL.                                                                                                           437



TABLE A3          Coefficient of the friction of distance specifications for the gravity equation

                                                 (1)                       (2)                      (3)
                                                 Full model                Full model               Full model
                                                 all functions             all functions            all functions
                                                 Benchmark (α = 2)         α = 1.5                  α = 2.5
  City population                                  0.0051 *** (0.0011)       0.0051 *** (0.0012)     0.0050 *** (0.0011)
  Population growth                                  1.1816 * (0.6231)         1.1212 * (0.6125)       1.2591 * (0.6537)
  Capital city                                       0.0007 (0.0008)         0.0007 (0.0008)         0.0014 (0.0011)
  Supranational organizations                       0.2116 ** (0.1012)        0.2184 ** (0.1036)      0.2115 ** (0.1020)
  Global connectivity                             14.5120 *** (3.2815)     15.1428 *** (3.2918)     15.1960 *** (3.2794)
  Federal State                                      0.3521 (0.2032)         0.3745 (0.2294)         0.3241 (0.2021)
  Functional diversity                             0.4219 *** (0.1032)       0.4221 *** (0.1030)     0.4194 *** (0.1026)
  Potential domestic interaction effects
  Smaller neighbouring city population                0.0012 (0.0012)           0.0009 (0.0010)          0.0007 (0.0014)
  Similar size neighbouring city population          0.0512 * (0.0269)         0.0381 * (0.0201)       0.0482 * (0.0248)
  Larger neighbouring city population            0.4316 *** (0.1269)        0.3924 * (0.2042)     0.3998 *** (0.1051)
  Potential cross-border interaction effects
  Smaller neighbouring city population                0.0012 (0.0012)           0.0015 (0.0011)          0.0012 (0.0015)
  Similar size neighbouring city population         0.0815 ** (0.0354)         0.0805 * (0.0419)        0.0812 *(0.0426)
  Larger neighbouring city population               0.0326 ** (0.0135)          0.0301 (0.0234)       0.0335 ** (0.0136)
  Constant                                       1.3613 *** (0.0618)      1.3251 *** (0.0601)     1.3619 *** (0.0622)
  Country dummies                                         YES                       YES                      YES
              2
  Pseudo R                                             0.4828                    0.4724                   0.4892
  Nb. Observations                                       1920                      1920                     1920

Notes: Standard errors between brackets.
***denotes significance at the 1% level,
**significance at 5%,
*significance at 10%.
TABLE A4          Estimations on sub-samples based on city population (small, medium-sized and large cities), SAR model                                                           438
                                                                       (1)                            (2)                                          (3)
                                               Bencemark—all cities    Small cities (<100.000 hab.)   Medium-sized cities (100.000–250.000 hab.)   Large cities (>250.000 hab.)
  City population                                0.0051 *** (0.0011)     0.0058 *** (0.0013)           0.0062 *** (0.0019)                          0.0044 *** (0.0015)
  Population growth                               1.1816 r* (0.6231)      1.2945 * (0.6813)              1.2351 * (0.6485)                            0.9841 * (0.5102)
  Capital city                                    0.0007 (0.0008)          0.0001 (0.0014)              0.0013 (0.0009)                             0.0029 (0.0018)
  Supranational organizations                     0.2116 ** (0.1012)        0.0014 (0.0084)             0.2418 ** (0.1182)                          0.3840 *** (0.1319)
  Global connectivity                          14.5120 *** (3.2815)      8.5174 *** (2.5418)          14.1841 *** (3.1971)                         16.1974 *** (3.8160)
  Federal State                                   0.3521 (0.2032)        0.3410 (0.2016)                0.0015 (0.1826)                             0.2140 (0.3152)
  Functional diversity                           0.4219 *** (0.1032)     0.3816 *** (0.1160)           0.4678 *** (0.1534)                          0.5214 *** (0.1671)
  Potential domestic interaction effects
  Smaller neighbouring city population              0.0012 (0.0012)                -                      0.0012 (0.0012)                               0.0008 (0.0011)
  Similar size neighbouring city population       0.0512 * (0.0269)       0.0315 * (0.0174)             0.0484 ** (0.0212)                           0.0514 ** (0.0241)
  Larger neighbouring city population          0.4316 *** (0.1269)     0.4614 ** (0.2049)           0.4015 ** (0.1841)                                      -
  Potential cross-border interaction effects
  Smaller neighbouring city population              0.0012 (0.0012)                -                      0.0014 (0.0019)                               0.0021 (0.0031)
  Similar size neighbouring city population       0.0815 ** (0.0354)        0.0401 (0.0312)             0.0864 ** (0.0421)                           0.0491 ** (0.0231)
  Larger neighbouring city population             0.0326 ** (0.0135)       0.0251 * (0.0133)           0.0719 *** (0.0181)                                     -
  Constant                                     1.3613 *** (0.0618)    1.3015 *** (0.0684)           1.4122 *** (0.0794)                         1.2947 *** (0.0814)
  Country dummies                                       YES                     YES                           YES                                           YES
  Pseudo R2                                          0.4828                  0.4656                        0.4814                                       0.4019
  Nb. Observations                                    1920                    1,421                           311                                           188

Notes: Standard errors between brackets.
***denotes significance at the 1% level,
**significance at 5%,
*significance at 10%.




                                                                                                                                                                                  SOHN ET AL.
DOI: 10.1111/pirs.12653




Resumen. Estar en la esfera de influencia de otras ciudades puede tener ventajas, ya que permite a las ciudades
“tomar prestado el tamaño”, pero esto también puede provocar efectos de competencia conocidos como “sombras
de aglomeración”. Este artículo examina cómo estos patrones de préstamo y sombras difieren de los entornos domé-
sticos cuando existe una frontera nacional entre las ciudades. Se encontró que las fronteras moderan las reg-
ularidades normales de un sistema de asentamiento. En particular, no existe el efecto de sombra que proyectan las
ciudades más grandes a través de las fronteras, y de hecho las fronteras protegen. La integración del mercado trans-
fronterizo beneficia especialmente a las ciudades fronterizas de tamaño similar. Dadas estas ventajas únicas, es hora
de que las ciudades fronterizas salgan de las sombras.



抄録: 他の都市の影響下にあることは、都市が「規模を借用する(to borrow size)」ことで利益がえられる一方
で、「集積の陰(agglomeration                shadows)」といわれる競争効果がもたらされる可能性がある。本稿では、こう
した、規模を借用すること(borrowing)と集積の陰にあること(shadowing)のパターンが、都市間に国境がある場
合では、国内でのパターンとどのように異なるかを検討する。国境は決済システムの正常な規則性を緩和する
ことが分かった。特に、大都市による集積の陰の国境を越える影響は認められないばかりか、国境による保護
が認められる。国境を越えた市場統合は、特に規模の同じ国境都市に利益をもたらす。こうしたユニークな利
点から、今こそ国境都市は集積の陰から抜け出すべきと考えられる。




© 2022 The Authors. Papers in Regional Science © 2021 Regional Science Association International.
