[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: journal/B05-brezzi-veneri-2015-assessing-polycentric-urban-systems-in-the-oecd-country-regional-and-metropolitan-perspectives-10.1080-09654313.2014.905005.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Title:           Assessing Polycentric Urban Systems in’the OECD: Country, Regional and Metropolitan Perspectives
Subject:         European Planning Studies, 2014. doi:10.1080/09654313.2014.905005
Keywords:        
Author:          MONICA BREZZI
Creator:         Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.520/W
Producer:        iText 4.2.0 by 1T3XT
CreationDate:    Tue Jun  3 09:23:47 2014 WIB
ModDate:         Sun Feb  8 03:58:42 2015 WIB
Custom Metadata: no
Metadata Stream: yes
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            AcroForm
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           20
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       493.228 x 702.992 pts
Page rot:        0
File size:       437560 bytes
Optimized:       no
PDF version:     1.4
[Extracted Text]
This article was downloaded by: [Selcuk Universitesi]
On: 07 February 2015, At: 12:58
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK



                                 European Planning Studies
                                 Publication details, including instructions for authors and
                                 subscription information:
                                 http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ceps20

                                 Assessing Polycentric Urban Systems
                                 in the OECD: Country, Regional and
                                 Metropolitan Perspectives
                                               a               a
                                 Monica Brezzi & Paolo Veneri
                                 a
                                  Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development,
                                 Regional Development Policy Division, GOV/RDP, Paris, France
                                 Published online: 04 Jun 2014.




Click for updates


To cite this article: Monica Brezzi & Paolo Veneri (2014): Assessing Polycentric Urban Systems
in the OECD: Country, Regional and Metropolitan Perspectives, European Planning Studies, DOI:
10.1080/09654313.2014.905005

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09654313.2014.905005



PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
                                                                Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
                                                                and-conditions




Downloaded by [Selcuk Universitesi] at 12:58 07 February 2015
                                                                European Planning Studies, 2014
                                                                http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09654313.2014.905005




                                                                Assessing Polycentric Urban Systems
                                                                in the OECD: Country, Regional and
                                                                Metropolitan Perspectives

                                                                MONICA BREZZI & PAOLO VENERI




Downloaded by [Selcuk Universitesi] at 12:58 07 February 2015
                                                                Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Regional Development Policy Division,
                                                                GOV/RDP, Paris, France



                                                                (Received August 2013; accepted January 2014)



                                                                ABSTRACT Contemporary urban systems in OECD countries are structured around functional
                                                                regions, which often overcome established city-boundaries. Reading space in terms of functional
                                                                regions allows assessing changes in urban hierarchies and spatial structures, including the
                                                                polycentricity of urban systems at national, regional and metropolitan scales. By using a
                                                                harmonized definition of functional urban areas in OECD countries, this paper first provides a
                                                                sound definition of polycentricity at each spatial scale, highlighting for each of them the different
                                                                links with policy. Second, it provides measures of polycentricity and explores the economic
                                                                implications of different spatial structures. Results show that relatively more monocentric regions
                                                                have higher GDP per capita than their more polycentric counterparts. At the country level, on
                                                                the other hand, polycentricity is associated with higher GDP per capita.




                                                                1. Introduction
                                                                The way people and economic activities organize in space has been changing over time.
                                                                Improvements in communication technologies, large and growing movements of people
                                                                and goods, and economic development processes have generated an enlargement of the
                                                                spaces where people live and work. These changes facilitated suburbanization processes
                                                                and an increasing integration of cities with their surrounding hinterland. The emerging
                                                                spaces where people live and work and where the bulk of economic interdependencies
                                                                takes place is referred to in the literature as “functional regions”. Among functional
                                                                regions, the “functional urban areas” (FUAs) are characterized by the presence of one
                                                                or more urban centres of different sizes and economic importance.

                                                                Correspondence Address: Paolo Veneri, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Regional
                                                                Development Policy Division, GOV/RDP, 2 Rue André-Pascal, 75775 Paris Cedex 16, France. Email: paolo.
                                                                veneri@oecd.org


                                                                # 2014 Istituto Regionale Programmazione Economica della Toscana IRPET. All Rights Reserved.
                                                                2   M. Brezzi & P. Veneri

                                                                   A better knowledge of urban spatial organization can have important consequences
                                                                on regional policy making. Half of OECD population live in the 275 large FUAs
                                                                (metropolitan areas) that contribute to more than 50% of GDP and employment of the
                                                                entire OECD. While the concentration of people in dense urban centres of “established”
                                                                OECD cities has slowed down or even decreased in some cases, the coming together of
                                                                people and business in urban areas of varying sizes has not stopped. Moreover, the
                                                                reduction of transport and communication costs will continue to make urban centres
                                                                increasingly interconnected and change urban areas from monocentric agglomerations
                                                                to a more “polycentric” system of integrated urban centres and sub-centres. The way
                                                                people in cities have access to education and jobs, decent housing, efficient transportation,
                                                                and a safe and sustainable environment will have a strong impact on national and global
                                                                prosperity, and thus a better understanding of the different urbanization forms will help
                                                                recognize the impact of different national and local strategies.




Downloaded by [Selcuk Universitesi] at 12:58 07 February 2015
                                                                   Polycentric agglomerations can be investigated at higher territorial scales beyond
                                                                metropolitan areas. For example, in many regions a number of cities and towns are increas-
                                                                ingly linking up and, similarly, OECD countries differ in the spatial organization and con-
                                                                nections among urban areas. Understanding the functioning and efficiency of these
                                                                connections can help clarify the links between urbanization and economic development.
                                                                Metropolitan areas tend to be more productive than other regions, and on average the
                                                                GDP per capita in OECD metropolitan areas was 15% higher than in the rest of the
                                                                economy in 2010 (OECD, 2013a).
                                                                   Previous works have investigated the role of polycentricity in modern urban systems
                                                                both for specific countries and comparatively for European countries (Espon, 2003;
                                                                Vandermotten et al., 2007). The policy relevance of understanding the links between
                                                                the spatial organization of urban areas and the socio-economic conditions of a country
                                                                or a region is apparent: both for national and local policy makers, it can help targeting pol-
                                                                icies, planning public services and designing the institutional organization and governance
                                                                mechanisms that can best support the development of different territories and contribute to
                                                                national growth. However, the empirical evidence on the links between polycentricity and
                                                                economic development is not conclusive and results seem to depend on the choice of
                                                                countries, the conceptual definition of polycentricity and on the indicators chosen to
                                                                measure this characteristic of spatial structure.
                                                                   This paper assesses the polycentric structure of OECD urban systems at three different
                                                                geographic scales: in a metropolitan area, a region and in a country. It does so by relying
                                                                on a common definition of FUAs applied to 29 OECD countries (OECD, 2012a). Sec-
                                                                ondly, the paper explores the implication of polycentricity at national and regional level
                                                                on the overall level of economic prosperity. The results show that OECD countries with
                                                                a more polycentric urban structure are associated with higher GDP per capita. However,
                                                                at the regional level, relatively more monocentric regions have higher GDP per capita
                                                                than their more polycentric counterparts.
                                                                   The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly recalls the method to define OECD
                                                                FUAs. Then, it articulates the concept of polycentricity at three different scales: in a
                                                                metropolitan area, as a network of urban areas in a larger region, and as the urban
                                                                system of a country. Section 3 provides some evidence on the spatial organization of
                                                                the OECD metropolitan areas and recent changes towards sprawl or instead more
                                                                compact development. Sections 4 and 5 apply the definition of polycentricity at regional
                                                                and country levels, respectively. In both cases a preliminary analysis of the links between
                                                                                                    Assessing Polycentric Urban Systems in the OECD            3

                                                                polycentricity and levels of GDP per capita is carried out. Possible improvements of these
                                                                results, including building internationally comparable measures of polycentricity based on
                                                                the functions carried out by cities, are discussed in Section 6, which concludes.


                                                                2. Polycentric Development and FUAs
                                                                2.1. Overview of the Methodology to Identify FUAs in OECD Countries
                                                                The method to identify FUAs within OECD countries integrates geographic information
                                                                sources (GIS) with administrative and survey sources to capture the highly densely popu-
                                                                lated areas (urban cores) and the commuting flows towards the urban cores regardless of
                                                                the administrative boundaries (Figure 1).
                                                                   The method consists of three main steps: the first step identifies contiguous or highly
                                                                interconnected densely inhabited urban cores, by using population grid data at 1 km2.




Downloaded by [Selcuk Universitesi] at 12:58 07 February 2015
                                                                The second step of the procedure allows the identification of urban cores that are not con-
                                                                tiguous but belong to the same FUA. Two urban cores are considered integrated, and thus
                                                                part of the same polycentric metropolitan area, if more than 15% of the working popu-
                                                                lation of any of the cores commutes to work in the other core. The third step defines
                                                                the commuting shed or hinterland of the FUA, by selecting those municipalities that
                                                                send at least 15% of their work force to the cores. More details can be found in OECD
                                                                (2012a).


                                                                2.2. Defining Polycentricity
                                                                The first necessary step of this analysis is a clear definition of the concept of polycentricity.
                                                                Starting with the most general meaning, any given area can be defined as polycentric if it
                                                                contains two or more centres. With just a bit more precision, an area is polycentric if its
                                                                population or employment is not concentrated to a substantial extent in one single
                                                                centre (Riguelle et al., 2007, p. 195). Considering the distribution of population and
                                                                employment in space means to interpret polycentricity as a “morphological” concept.
                                                                It should be pointed out that the literature distinguishes between a morphological




                                                                  Figure 1. Urban and non-urban population density; functional and administrative boundaries:
                                                                                                      Houston and Paris.
                                                                 Source: OECD calculations based on population density disaggregated with Corine Land Cover,
                                                                                Joint Research Centre for the European Environmental Agency.
                                                                4   M. Brezzi & P. Veneri

                                                                dimension—which focuses on population, employment, land use, etc.—and a more
                                                                “functional” one (Nordregio, 2005; Burger and Meijers, 2012; Veneri, 2013a)—linked
                                                                to the functions carried out by cities or the connections among them (e.g. commuting
                                                                flows). However, the two dimensions are very much related to one another. The morpho-
                                                                logical dimension of polycentricity focuses on the size and distribution of urban centres
                                                                across space. This dimension is often associated with the extent to which territory is
                                                                characterized by a balanced development. The functional dimension of polycentricity
                                                                focuses less on the internal characteristics of the centres—such as size, density, etc.—
                                                                and more on the way these centres organize the rest of the territory by supplying the func-
                                                                tions that shape the territorial hierarchies (Green, 2007; De Goei et al., 2010).
                                                                   Whether a functional or a morphological approach to polycentricity is adopted can also
                                                                depend on the territorial level at which this concept is applied. For the sake of simplicity,
                                                                ESPON 3.1 (2003) classified the territorial scales in three categories, namely “micro”,




Downloaded by [Selcuk Universitesi] at 12:58 07 February 2015
                                                                “meso” and “macro” ones. Departing from the Espon classification, this paper considers
                                                                three major perspectives with which to look at polycentricity, namely the metropolitan,
                                                                the regional and the national perspectives. Adopting the former scale implies considering
                                                                the spatial organization within the metropolitan space, which is a space characterized by
                                                                one single—or multiple overlapping—labour market areas. On the other hand, the national
                                                                perspective looks at the spatial structure of the entire national urban system or, in the case
                                                                of the European space, supra-national urban system. Finally, the regional perspective
                                                                refers to networks of two or more FUAs which are connected through functional relation-
                                                                ships and lie in the same larger administrative region. This intermediate perspective draws
                                                                on concepts that have been widely analysed in the literature, such as the polycentric urban
                                                                region (PUR) (Dieleman & Faludi, 1998; Kloosterman & Musterd, 2001; Parr, 2004).
                                                                Different spatial scales are associated with different meanings and potential policy
                                                                issues at stake. For urban systems at each scale, metropolitan, regional and national, the
                                                                polycentric spatial structure is interpreted and analysed through the lens of the FUAs,
                                                                as identified by the OECD. Table 1 proposes a summary.


                                                                                     Table 1.   Polycentricity at three spatial scales: a summary

                                                                Geographical scale              Measures                          Potential policy issues

                                                                Intra-metropolitan     Sprawl Index                Efficiency in land use
                                                                                       Share of people and jobs Environmental concerns
                                                                                         in urban centres
                                                                                                                   Transport and public services efficiency
                                                                Regional (inter-       Relative importance of      Regional agglomeration economies
                                                                  metropolitan)          the largest city
                                                                                       Size distribution of cities Intra-regional territorial disparities in access to
                                                                                                                      services and variety of consumption
                                                                                       Connectivity among
                                                                                         cities
                                                                National               Relative importance of      Possible need for a national policy for urban areas
                                                                                         the largest city             to focus on the potential of all cities, fostering
                                                                                                                      agglomeration economies and ensuring policy
                                                                                                                      coherence.
                                                                                       Size distribution of cities Territorial disparities (income, services,
                                                                                                                      consumption)
                                                                                                     Assessing Polycentric Urban Systems in the OECD              5

                                                                3. Metropolitan Scale
                                                                Spatial structure at the metropolitan scale has a multi-dimensional policy relevance. The
                                                                way population and economic activities distribute across the metropolitan space can affect
                                                                the economic performance of metropolitan areas, through shaping the intensity of agglom-
                                                                eration economies (Garcı́a-López & Muñiz, 2013). In addition, spatial structure can be
                                                                important for efficiency in the provision of public services. Public transport can be
                                                                more efficiently organized when people and jobs are concentrated in centres of a certain
                                                                size, which ensure the achievement of economies of scale. Other issues regard energy con-
                                                                sumption, green space and land use. Regarding transport, for example, the degree of
                                                                metropolitan polycentricity has been found to be associated with higher car dependency
                                                                (Glaeser & Kahn, 2004), but evidence on the possible effect on travel time and distance
                                                                is still ambiguous (Schwanen et al., 2004; Veneri, 2010; Modarres, 2011).
                                                                   Assessing polycentricity at the metropolitan scale means to put the focus on a self-orga-




Downloaded by [Selcuk Universitesi] at 12:58 07 February 2015
                                                                nized and economically integrated space, often characterized by a single labour market
                                                                area or several overlapping ones. At this scale, spatial structure has been traditionally con-
                                                                ceptualized in urban economics as monocentric, with a central business district (CBD)
                                                                located at the centre of the area (Alonso, 1964; Muth, 1969; Mills, 1972). The CBD is
                                                                characterized by the highest job density, which declines monotonically as the distance
                                                                from the CBD increases. However, metropolitan areas have been expanding in the last
                                                                decades and their spheres of influence have regionalized. Their extension goes often
                                                                well beyond traditional administrative boundaries and, as a consequence, other new or
                                                                pre-existing centres coalesce or integrate in the larger “functional region” (Champion,
                                                                2001) or emerge from a decentralization process from the CBD (Anas et al., 1998).
                                                                These processes challenged traditional monocentric models in urban economics and
                                                                stimulated the introduction of new models, which incorporate the possibility of polycentric
                                                                and dispersed structures (Anas et al., 1998; White, 1999).
                                                                    Figure 2 shows the density patterns of population in the metropolitan areas of Paris and
                                                                San Francisco. The figure shows that despite density decreasing, on average, as distance to
                                                                the main centre increases, this pattern is not monotonic and there are several local peaks of




                                                                Figure 2. Density patterns in the FUAs of Paris (France) and San Francisco (USA). Density does not
                                                                                 decrease monotonically as distance to the main centre increases.
                                                                Note: Units of analysis are municipalities in the case of Paris and Census tracks for San Francisco.
                                                                                      Source: Author’s elaboration on National Census data.
                                                                6   M. Brezzi & P. Veneri

                                                                high density. This should indicate the presence of metropolitan sub-centres, hence a poly-
                                                                centric spatial structure. Under this perspective, one simple way to measure the degree of
                                                                metropolitan polycentricity consists in identifying those spatial units that can be con-
                                                                sidered as sub-centres and computing their share of population (or employment) over
                                                                total metropolitan population (or employment).
                                                                   Metropolitan polycentricity can also be seen from a different angle, by focusing on
                                                                morphological features and land development patterns. Under this perspective, metropo-
                                                                litan polycentricity can be seen as a model of urban development that is an alternative to
                                                                dispersion and that is sometimes called “decentralised concentration” (Frey, 1999). In
                                                                principle, it combines the need to accommodate urbanization with that of limiting gener-
                                                                alized dispersion of activities across space, which is often referred to as sprawl or “Edge-
                                                                less” city (Lang, 2003; OECD, 2012b). Using the OECD definition of FUAs, it is possible
                                                                to look at the dynamics of land use and to assess whether metropolitan areas are following




Downloaded by [Selcuk Universitesi] at 12:58 07 February 2015
                                                                patterns of development towards sprawl or compactness. According to Brueckner (2001),
                                                                sprawl is defined here as the “excessive” urbanization. A simple Sprawl Index (SI) has
                                                                been developed to measure the growth in built-up area adjusted for the growth in city
                                                                population (OECD, 2013a). When the population is stable, the SI corresponds to the
                                                                growth of the built-up area. When the city population changes, the index measures the
                                                                increase in the built-up area relative to a benchmark where the built-up area would
                                                                have increased in line with population growth. The index is calculated as in the
                                                                formula below (1):

                                                                                              [urbi,t+n − (urbi,t ∗(popi,t+n /popi,t ))]
                                                                                      SIi =                                              ∗100,              (1)
                                                                                                              urbi,t

                                                                where i refers to the ith metropolitan area; t refers to the initial year; t + n is to the final
                                                                year; urb is to the number of square kilometres of the total built-up area; pop is total popu-
                                                                lation.
                                                                   The Sprawl Index shows a high degree of heterogeneity between the patterns of urban
                                                                development within metropolitan areas in Europe, Japan and the USA.1 There is not an
                                                                overall sprawling pattern emerging. Between 2000 and 2006 one-third of the metropolitan
                                                                areas experienced positive variation in the Sprawl Index (with the average value for the
                                                                OECD being 0.8%), hence the growth of built-up land was faster than the growth of the
                                                                population. In other words the built-up area per person has increased. Figure 3 shows
                                                                some of the metropolitan areas with the highest values of the Sprawl Index. Several metro-
                                                                politan areas of Japan, Las Palmas and Zaragoza (Spain) and Tallin (Estonia) show values
                                                                higher than 10%. However, they had relatively lower levels of built-up area per person in
                                                                2000, compared to metropolitan areas in the USA.
                                                                   The patterns of spatial structure within metropolitan areas can have different impli-
                                                                cations in economic, environmental and social terms. While this section does not
                                                                explore empirically any of these relationships, it is enough to say that much work has
                                                                been produced on the costs of sprawl, despite the lack of agreement on the actual ration-
                                                                ality of policies aimed at containing this phenomenon. On policentricity, on the other
                                                                hand, much less work has been done to understand whether this pattern of spatial devel-
                                                                opment might improve the efficiency in land use or the environmental conditions if com-
                                                                pared to sprawl.
                                                                                                  Assessing Polycentric Urban Systems in the OECD         7




Downloaded by [Selcuk Universitesi] at 12:58 07 February 2015
                                                                          Figure 3. Top 30 OECD metropolitan areas for urban sprawl, 2000–2006.
                                                                Source: Own calculations from OECD metropolitan database. Only Europe, Japan and the USA are
                                                                                                        included.



                                                                4. Network of Cities: Polycentricity at Regional Level
                                                                New concepts have been introduced in the last two decades to identify and describe
                                                                regional spatial structures where several urban areas co-exist and might be able to generate
                                                                positive externalities beyond the boundaries of the urban areas. Among these concepts,
                                                                Dieleman and Faludi (1998) refer to “Polynucleated Urban Field”, while Parr uses the
                                                                expression PUR (Parr, 2004). Following Parr, PURs are regions—which can be both
                                                                administratively defined or approached functionally—that are organized around several
                                                                urban areas. These areas should be morphologically separated but still kept in close phys-
                                                                ical proximity and, in order to develop synergy, they should be functionally connected
                                                                and/or have complementary sectoral specializations (Parr, 2004, p. 232). A PUR is
                                                                hence characterized by a substantial equilibrium—or low hierarchy—among cities in
                                                                terms of population and economic power (Bailey & Turok, 2001) and from a clear physical
                                                                separation between its centres.
                                                                   The characteristics of regional spatial structures can have different implications in
                                                                terms of economic outcomes through, for example, agglomeration economies (Duranton
                                                                & Puga, 2004; Rosenthal & Strange, 2004; Combes et al., 2012) or consumption
                                                                benefits, ensured by a higher variety of consumption possibilities in large agglomera-
                                                                tions (Glaeser et al., 2001). These advantages can be reached in large cities with high
                                                                population and job density. However, it has also been argued that the advantages of
                                                                agglomeration can be “regionalized”, and achieved in regions characterized by the pres-
                                                                ence of several interconnected urban centres. This hypothesis was first advanced by
                                                                Alonso (1973) through the idea that polycentric regions can exploit synergies emerging
                                                                from co-operation and complementarities among centres, as if each centre could
                                                                “borrow” its size from the rest of the region, compensating for an eventual lack of
                                                                large agglomerations.
                                                                8   M. Brezzi & P. Veneri

                                                                   The potential economic implications of polycentric spatial structures include, in
                                                                addition to the economies of scale (borrowing size), also other aspects linked to the com-
                                                                plexity and diversity of functions. In the words of Parr (2002), these advantages should be
                                                                named “regional externalities”, considered less strict in terms of spatial agglomeration of
                                                                individuals and organizations than agglomeration and localization externalities. Regional
                                                                externalities can emerge especially in the context of regions characterized by city-network
                                                                relationships, providing benefits such as sharing high-scale infrastructures, highly quali-
                                                                fied specialized services (Priemus, 1994) or exploiting regional complementarities that
                                                                might emerge from local endowments of hard and soft factors of development.
                                                                   Using the OECD definition of FUAs, it is possible to identify the nodes of regional poly-
                                                                centricity in OECD large administrative regions (TL2). The latter are chosen as units of
                                                                analysis, since they represent the first tier of sub-national government in OECD countries
                                                                and are sufficiently comparable in terms of functions. Figure 4 shows two TL2 regions in




Downloaded by [Selcuk Universitesi] at 12:58 07 February 2015
                                                                Europe of similar area size, namely Aragon (Spain) and Brittany ( France), which appear
                                                                to have very different spatial structures. The former is characterized by one single major
                                                                metropolitan area only (Zaragoza), while in the latter region several small and medium-
                                                                sized FUAs co-exist with the metropolitan area of Rennes. Close-by FUAs—especially
                                                                when sharing a common higher administrative tier—are often involved in co-operation
                                                                initiatives for purposes of economic development strategy or service provision and
                                                                recent OECD analyses provide several examples in this respect (OECD, 2013b).
                                                                   Through a consistent delineation of FUAs, regional polycentricity across 29 OECD
                                                                countries is assessed quantitatively in this section, which then explores how polycentricity
                                                                is associated with the level of regional economic development. The first step consists in
                                                                identifying a measure of polycentric development. In principle, a complete and sound
                                                                measure of polycentricity should take into account the population size of centres, their dis-
                                                                tribution and their connectivity (Wegener, 2013). Considering all these dimensions at the
                                                                same time helps not to lose too much of the complexity of polycentric spatial structures
                                                                and to adopt at the same time some morphological (size and distribution) and functional




                                                                Figure 4. Monocentric vs. polycentric regional spatial structures: the case of Aragon (Spain) and
                                                                                                      Brittany ( France).
                                                                                     Source: Authors’ elaborations from OECD (2012a).
                                                                                                   Assessing Polycentric Urban Systems in the OECD          9

                                                                (connectivity) features. However, this may imply the use of composite indicators, which
                                                                are more discretional and require a much higher amount of data. For the purpose of this
                                                                paper, simple and straightforward measures of polycentricity for regions and countries
                                                                have been preferred, following existing literature (Meijers & Sandberg, 2008; Veneri &
                                                                Burgalassi, 2012). The first is urban primacy, which considers the share of population
                                                                in the most populated city over the total regional population or over the sum of the
                                                                urban population of a region. For the OECD TL2 regions, urban primacy is here
                                                                defined as the share of population in the most populated FUA over total regional popu-
                                                                lation. Intuitively, the higher the primacy, the higher the regional monocentricity.
                                                                   Polycentricity at the regional (and national) scale can also be measured through the beta
                                                                coefficient of the following equation:

                                                                                                ln (rank) = a + b ln (size),                              (2)




Downloaded by [Selcuk Universitesi] at 12:58 07 February 2015
                                                                where size is total population of each FUA within a given region; rank is the rank, com-
                                                                puted by region, of FUAs by size. The slope of the line interpolating data, given by the
                                                                estimated beta, indicates the level of hierarchy among FUAs, and thus the level of poly-
                                                                centricity of each region. By definition, the beta coefficient is negative. In absolute terms,
                                                                the higher the value of beta—hence the steeper the line interpolating data—the higher the
                                                                level of polycentricity. The use of functionally defined urban areas as building blocks for
                                                                regional polycentricity allows beta coefficients to approximate the hierarchical distri-
                                                                bution of cities over regional territory without making the mistake of considering places
                                                                that are part of a single integrated area (e.g. municipalities) as separated nodes of the
                                                                urban systems (Kloosterman & Musterd, 2001; Parr, 2004).
                                                                   Matching FUAs with TL2 administrative boundaries is not always straightforward.
                                                                Some large FUAs (e.g. Paris, Prague, etc.) cover a space that is larger than the adminis-
                                                                trative region where they are located. In some other cases, several FUAs fall within the
                                                                boundaries of one single region. In order to minimize possible inconsistencies, FUAs
                                                                are allocated to regions on the basis of the location of the urban core only. However, all
                                                                indicators of spatial structure, such as primacy and polycentricity, are computed by con-
                                                                sidering data at the level of the whole FUAs (both cores and hinterlands). Adopting this
                                                                method, there are still regions with a value of urban primacy that is larger than 1. This
                                                                can happen when FUAs’ cores cross different administrative regions. In order to avoid
                                                                biases—and for the sake of simplicity—these regions have not been considered in the
                                                                analysis.
                                                                   In this work, the coefficients of equation (2) were estimated for OECD TL2 regions in
                                                                order to assess their degree of polycentricity. Clearly, not all the regions have FUAs inside
                                                                their territories. Some have no FUAs, hence they can be classified as rural regions, while
                                                                others have just one, hence they are considered as monocentric. Others have two or more,
                                                                so they are polycentric. Consistently with Meijers and Burger (2010) coefficients of
                                                                equation (2) were estimated taking into account, for each region, the four largest FUAs
                                                                only, so as to ensure consistency in the number of observations considered and a conse-
                                                                quent higher comparability among regions. Figure 5 shows the rank-size distribution of
                                                                the four main FUAs in the Capital region of Korea and Brittany (France). A steeper
                                                                slope of the line interpolating data indicates a higher degree of polycentricity. The
                                                                Korean Capital Region is the one with the lowest level of polycentricity among 147
                                                                OECD regions with at least four FUAs within their respective territory.
                                                                10    M. Brezzi & P. Veneri




                                                                     Figure 5. Rank-size distribution of FUAs in Brittany (France) and Capital Region (Korea).
                                                                                  Source: Authors’ elaboration on OECD metropolitan database.




Downloaded by [Selcuk Universitesi] at 12:58 07 February 2015
                                                                   Primacy and polycentricity represent two key features of regional spatial structure. A
                                                                regression analysis was carried out in order to provide some first international evidence
                                                                on how regions characterized by a presence of several cities of similar size—hence
                                                                those that are more polycentric—are associated with socio-economic conditions. Accord-
                                                                ing to the hypothesis of “borrowing size” the advantages emerging from large agglomera-
                                                                tions should be compensated by a polycentric spatial structure. More specifically, this
                                                                relationship was explored by looking at how the levels of regional GDP per capita are
                                                                associated with characteristics of spatial structure, after controlling for other basic factors.
                                                                   Data used in the analysis come from the OECD regional and metropolitan database. The
                                                                dependent variable is the natural logarithm of GDP per capita expressed in Purchasing
                                                                Power Parity US$. Independent variables included in the analysis are the following:
                                                                “size” is the total regional population; “education” is the share of workforce holding ter-
                                                                tiary education; “primacy” is the share of population in the largest FUA located in the
                                                                region over total regional population; “d_polycentricity” is a dummy equal to 1 when
                                                                the region has at least two FUAs in its territory, 0 otherwise; “beta∗ polycentricity” is a
                                                                direct measure of the degree of regional polycentricity and it is computed as the interaction
                                                                between “d_polycentricity” and the beta coefficients of the rank-size equation (2);
                                                                “metro_share” is the share of regional population that live in FUAs; “d_East_Europe”
                                                                and “d_West_Europe” are dummies equal to 1 when the region is located in Eastern Euro-
                                                                pean countries or Western European countries, respectively.2 These dummies were
                                                                included in order to control for the spatial heterogeneity in OECD countries and for
                                                                some peculiar characteristics of Europe related with both spatial development and
                                                                policy. In fact, the idea of preserving the polycentric development that historically charac-
                                                                terizes European territory has been shaping the EU spatial policy (Davoudi, 2003). All the
                                                                variables refer to 2010.
                                                                    Table 2 reports the results of different model specifications. Model 1 considers primacy
                                                                only (share of regional population living in the largest city) as feature of spatial structure,
                                                                while Model 2 considers polycentricity. Model 3 includes both primacy and polycentri-
                                                                city, while Model 4 controls for the total share of people living in FUAs instead of the
                                                                primacy. These different specifications help interpreting results with more robustness,
                                                                given possible collinearity among different variables of spatial structures (“primacy”
                                                                and “beta∗ polycentricity” show a linear correlation of 20.39).3 Results confirm that
Downloaded by [Selcuk Universitesi] at 12:58 07 February 2015
                                                                                                                                 Table 2.    OLS estimation results

                                                                Variable                               Model 1                              Model 2                              Model 3                    Model 4

                                                                constant                     25.933           (0.432)∗∗∗          26.271           (0.509)∗∗∗         26.424          (0.506)∗∗∗   26.245        (0.518)∗∗∗
                                                                Size                          0.085           (0.028)∗∗∗           0.122           (0.038)∗∗∗          0.128          (0.037)∗∗∗    0.121        (0.038)∗∗∗
                                                                                                              (0.345)∗∗∗                           (0.341)∗∗∗                         (0.341)∗∗∗                 (0.345)∗∗∗




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Assessing Polycentric Urban Systems in the OECD
                                                                education                     2.420                                2.546                               2.399                        2.559
                                                                d_East_Europe                20.037           (0.093)              0.066           (0.098)             0.059          (0.097)       0.062        (0.099)
                                                                d_West_Europe                 0.354           (0.074)∗∗∗           0.423           (0.073)∗∗∗          0.418          (0.073)∗∗∗    0.422        (0.074)∗∗∗
                                                                primacy                       0.372           (0.134)∗∗∗                                               0.256          (0.137)∗
                                                                d_polycentricity                                                  20.055           (0.113)            20.052          (0.112)      20.167        (0.061)∗∗∗
                                                                beta∗ polycentricity                                              20.170           (0.057)∗∗∗         20.149          (0.058)∗∗    20.048        (0.114)
                                                                metro_share                                                                                                                        20.017        (0.075)
                                                                Number of obs.                 206                                  206                                  206                        206
                                                                Adj. R-squared                 0.376                                0.395                                0.402                      0.393
                                                                mean VIF                       1.17                                 1.39                                 1.38                       1.40

                                                                Notes: Dependent variable: GDP per capita in 2010 (US$, PPP). Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
                                                                ∗
                                                                  Statistically significant at 10% confidence level.
                                                                ∗∗
                                                                   Statistically significant at 5% confidence level.
                                                                ∗∗∗
                                                                    Statistically significant at 1% confidence level.
                                                                Source: Authors’ elaboration on OECD regional and metropolitan database.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              11
                                                                12   M. Brezzi & P. Veneri

                                                                once controlling for overall size, education levels and macro-geographical location,
                                                                regions where a larger part of the population is located in the largest FUA (higher
                                                                primacy) have, on average, higher GDP per capita. This result is consistent with previous
                                                                analyses focusing on single countries or in Europe only (Cervero, 2001; Vandermotten
                                                                et al., 2007; Veneri & Burgalassi, 2012).
                                                                   Regarding polycentricity, regions characterized by a lower degree of polycentricity—
                                                                hence those with a more hierarchical system—are associated with higher levels of GDP
                                                                per capita, consistently with other studies focusing on single countries (Veneri & Burga-
                                                                lassi, 2011, 2012). The extent to which one single or more FUAs are located within
                                                                regional territories emerges instead as not correlated with the dependent variable
                                                                (“d_polycentricity” is not statistically significant). The sign of the coefficient related to
                                                                the “beta∗ polycentricty” variable does not support the hypothesis that higher levels of
                                                                GDP per capita are correlated to a polycentric structure of urban centres of different




Downloaded by [Selcuk Universitesi] at 12:58 07 February 2015
                                                                sizes (i.e. that smaller urban centres can functioning like larger ones by “borrowing
                                                                size” from the larger ones in the same region). Regarding the other variables included
                                                                in the analysis, regional size and the share of people with high education are associated
                                                                with higher levels of GDP per capita, consistently with expectations and with existing lit-
                                                                erature. The total share of urban population, instead, does not emerge to be statistically
                                                                significant.
                                                                   These results should be seen as a preliminary exploration of a complex and multi-
                                                                faceted relationship between spatial structure and regional socio-economic conditions
                                                                from an international comparative perspective. The need to use different measures of poly-
                                                                centricity that can account also for the connectivity among urban centres should be taken
                                                                into account. In addition, linking the self-organization of the territory (FUAs) with the
                                                                administrative structure (TL2 regions), is not obvious, since, by definition, functional ter-
                                                                ritories can easily cross regional administrative boundaries. This makes it more difficult to
                                                                allocate FUAs to the “right” administrative entity.

                                                                5. Polycentric Development at Country Level
                                                                Assessing the polycentric structure of national urban systems is a relevant task for policy.
                                                                Especially in the current economic downturn that many OECD countries have been facing
                                                                in the last few years, there is a need to understand what contribution to national prosperity
                                                                comes from the different regions and whether investment priorities should move towards
                                                                few large and capital cities or spread in a wider set of cities (Dijkstra et al., 2013; Parkin-
                                                                son et al., 2014). In Europe, a polycentric spatial development is seen as a tool to ensure a
                                                                more balanced, competitive and sustainable territorial development (ESDP, 1999). In this
                                                                respect, a research question emerging from this policy framework concerns the role of
                                                                polycentricity as a way to achieve better development and lower inequalities at the
                                                                country level.
                                                                   The spatial structure of national urban systems has been studied for a long time. Overall,
                                                                the empirical evidence indicates that the distribution of cities over space follows a power
                                                                law—mostly in the form of a Pareto distribution—meaning that the product of the rank and
                                                                the size of cities is a constant (Cheshire, 1999; Gabaix & Ioannides, 2004; Veneri, 2013b).
                                                                Several theoretical explanations have been provided for this empirical evidence, from
                                                                random shocks related with population migration, productivity and innovation (Gabaix,
                                                                1999; Eeckhout, 2004; Duranton, 2007) to Christallerian approaches based on functions
                                                                                                  Assessing Polycentric Urban Systems in the OECD          13

                                                                played by cities of different sizes (Hsu, 2012). Notwithstanding the robust evidence on the
                                                                regularity in the relationship between rank and size of cities at the national level, spatial
                                                                structures of urban systems differ across countries. Some countries are more polycentric
                                                                than others, meaning that they are organized around a flatter urban hierarchy, where the
                                                                latter is reflected by the coexistence of more cities of similar size, especially in the
                                                                right tail of the size distribution.
                                                                   Consistently with the interpretation carried out at the regional level, the rank – size
                                                                relationship of the FUAs located in a country gives an idea of the relative importance
                                                                of large and small cities as well as a measure of the degree of national polycentricity.
                                                                Higher values of beta coefficients (in absolute value) from the rank-size estimation indi-
                                                                cate a higher degree of national polycentricity. Figure 6 plots the rank-size relationship in
                                                                the natural logarithm scale for the national urban systems of Korea and Germany. The
                                                                higher absolute value of the beta coefficient for Germany indicates a higher degree of




Downloaded by [Selcuk Universitesi] at 12:58 07 February 2015
                                                                polycentricity compared with the Korean urban system.
                                                                   In order to measure and compare the degree of polycentricity of national urban systems,
                                                                beta coefficients were estimated using, for each country, the four largest FUAs only, consist-
                                                                ently with what was previously done at regional level. This choice allows comparing 26
                                                                OECD countries, excluding only Luxembourg, Estonia and Slovenia, which have 1, 3 and
                                                                2 FUAs, respectively. Focusing on the four largest FUAs is also a way to better account
                                                                for the differences in size—and hierarchical rank—among the largest cities, also catching
                                                                some aspects of urban primacy.
                                                                   At the national level, the degree of polycentricity appears to be positively correlated
                                                                with average levels of economic prosperity in the 26 OECD countries considered.
                                                                Figure 7 (partial residual plot) shows that more polycentric countries show on average
                                                                higher levels of GDP per capita. The figure plots the relationship between the degree of
                                                                polycentricity (beta coefficients at national level) and the natural logarithm of GDP per
                                                                capita expressed in Purchasing Power Parity US$ in 2010 after having controlled for
                                                                few other basic variables4 in a simple linear model. Controls include the degree of
                                                                urban primacy, the share of workforce holding tertiary education (education)—all referred
                                                                to 2010—and two dummies equal to 1 when the country is located in Eastern Europe or
                                                                Western Europe, respectively. While it must be acknowledged that the limited number
                                                                of observations and the cross-country nature of the regression analysis make only a




                                                                               Figure 6. Rank-size distributions of FUAs in Korea and Germany.
                                                                                 Source: Authors’ elaboration on OECD metropolitan database.
                                                                14   M. Brezzi & P. Veneri




Downloaded by [Selcuk Universitesi] at 12:58 07 February 2015
                                                                Figure 7. Degree of polycentricity and GDP per capita at national level, 2010 (partial residual plot).
                                                                        Source: Authors’ elaborations on OECD data (http://dotstat.oecd.org/Index.aspx).



                                                                first description of the relationship under investigation possible, it is interesting to note that
                                                                this result is opposite to the one emerging at the regional level.
                                                                   The relationship plotted in Figure 7 suggests that polycentricity at country level is not
                                                                likely to reflect the borrowing size mechanism that was hypothesized at the regional scale.
                                                                In fact, urban and metropolitan areas in polycentric countries are not necessarily located in
                                                                close proximity, and network relationship might be less important. The potential advan-
                                                                tages of polycentricity at the country scale in terms of economic conditions may come
                                                                from lower levels of agglomeration costs, which can be spread throughout several
                                                                FUAs. Another possible explanation is that in a more polycentric structure, a bigger
                                                                part of the national territory benefits from being close to at least one large FUA compared
                                                                to, for example, a situation where people are more concentrated in just one large FUA. As
                                                                far as urban primacy is concerned, this turns out to be not associated with the levels of
                                                                GDP per capita.


                                                                6. Concluding Remarks
                                                                This work contributes to the understanding of the spatial structure of urban systems and its
                                                                relevance for policy. It focuses on polycentricity, which is defined and treated separately at
                                                                three different spatial scales: metropolitan, regional and national. The conceptual defi-
                                                                nition of polycentricity as well as the indicators used to measure such phenomena
                                                                builds on a consistent definition of FUAs across OECD countries. FUAs are used as build-
                                                                                                  Assessing Polycentric Urban Systems in the OECD           15

                                                                ing block to assess, on a wide international basis, the polycentric spatial structure of metro-
                                                                politan, regional and national urban systems.
                                                                   The possibility of comparing a large set of different OECD countries imposed a high
                                                                approximation in the measures adopted to assess polycentricity. It has to be specified
                                                                that this work considers polycentricity in its morphological dimension, not taking into
                                                                account the connectivity among centres, which is another key dimension of this phenom-
                                                                enon, especially at the regional level. In this respect, two possible refinements of the analy-
                                                                sis could be considered. First, further effort is needed to harmonize other information
                                                                available across different countries in order to assess polycentricity in a more comprehen-
                                                                sive way, also accounting for more functional dimensions. Second, compiling annual time
                                                                series for the relevant variables on the FUAs would allow longitudinal analyses to be
                                                                carried out, providing more robust empirical evidence on the relevance of spatial struc-
                                                                tures in shaping socio-economic processes of countries, regions and metropolitan areas.




Downloaded by [Selcuk Universitesi] at 12:58 07 February 2015
                                                                   Assessing spatial structure and polycentricity has different potential implications for
                                                                policy making at the three spatial levels considered. At the metropolitan level, the way
                                                                people and economic activities are distributed across space raises important issues of effi-
                                                                ciency in terms of public service provision, face-to-face interactions among economic
                                                                agents, efficiency of transport and environmental issues connected with patterns of land
                                                                development (e.g. sprawl). At the regional scale, spatial structures can influence economic
                                                                development. More specifically, the presence of large metropolitan areas enhances
                                                                agglomeration economies and consumption benefits. A polycentric spatial structure
                                                                characterized by a network of cities has been thought to have the potential to compensate
                                                                for the advantages of a single large agglomeration (borrowed size hypothesis, see also
                                                                Burger et al., 2014). However, our preliminary empirical exploration suggests that
                                                                lower polycentricity and higher urban primacy are associated with higher GDP per
                                                                capita. This may suggest that physical distance and agglomeration of people and
                                                                workers have an important role for socio-economic conditions in regions. On the other
                                                                hand, at the national level, more polycentric structures are found to be positively associated
                                                                with GDP per capita. These first descriptive results suggest that the meaning and the policy
                                                                significance of polycentricity are strongly affected by the scale at which it is observed. In
                                                                economic terms, a balance between monocentricity at the regional level and polycentricity
                                                                at wider spatial scales might be assumed. Polycentricity has been representing a key policy
                                                                goal in the European policy discourse, where polycentric development is also seen as a
                                                                policy tool to reach a more balanced development, hence lower territorial disparities.
                                                                However, the main message emerging from this paper is that policy aimed at fostering
                                                                polycentricity should be referred to specific spatial scales and should be more informed
                                                                on the possible implications in economic and environmental respects.

                                                                Acknowledgements
                                                                The authors would like to thank Joaquim Oliveira Martins, Rudiger Ahrend, Karen
                                                                Maguire, William Tompson and two anonymous referees for their helpful comments and
                                                                discussions. Authors thank also, for their valuable comments, Roberto Camagni, Roberta
                                                                Capello and all the participants in the International Seminar on “Welfare and Competitive-
                                                                ness in the European polycentric urban structure: which role for metropolitan, medium and
                                                                small cities?” that took place in Florence on June 2013. The views expressed in this paper
                                                                are those of the authors and do not reflect those of the OECD or its member countries.
                                                                16    M. Brezzi & P. Veneri

                                                                Notes
                                                                     1. The Sprawl Index could not be computed in Canada, Chile, Korea and Mexico due to the absence of the
                                                                        land use layer in two points in time for these countries.
                                                                     2. Among the countries included in the analysis, those considered as Eastern European ones are Czech
                                                                        Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Poland, Slovenia and Slovak Republic.
                                                                     3. In any case, all models show a very low Variance Inflation Factors, which suggest no problems of multi-
                                                                        collinearity.
                                                                     4. All the variables have been computed from the OECD database (http://dotstat.oecd.org/Index.aspx).



                                                                References
                                                                Alonso, W. (1964) Location and Land Use (Cambridge: Harvard University Press).
                                                                Alonso, W. (1973) Urban zero population growth, Daedalus, 102(4), pp. 191–206.




Downloaded by [Selcuk Universitesi] at 12:58 07 February 2015
                                                                Anas, A., Arnott, R. & Small, K. A. (1998) Urban spatial structure, Journal of Economic Literature, 36(3),
                                                                     pp. 1426–1464.
                                                                Bailey, N. & Turok, I. (2001) Central Scotland as a polycentric urban region: Useful planning concept or
                                                                     chimera? Urban Studies, 38(4), pp. 697– 715.
                                                                Brueckner, J. K. (2001) Urban sprawl: Lessons from urban economics, in: J. R. Pack & W. G. Gale (Eds) Brook-
                                                                     ings Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs, pp. 65–97 (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press).
                                                                Burger, M. & Meijers, E. (2012) Form follows function? Linking morphological and functional polycentricity,
                                                                     Urban Studies, 49(5), pp. 1127–1149.
                                                                Burger, M., Meijers, E., Hoogerbrugge, M. & Masip Tresserra, J. (2014) Borrowed size, agglomeration shadows
                                                                     and cultural amenities in North-West Europe, European Planning Studies. doi:10.1080/09654313.2014.
                                                                     905002
                                                                Cervero, R. (2001) Efficient urbanisation: Economic performance and the shape of the metropolis, Urban Studies,
                                                                     38(1), pp. 1651– 1671.
                                                                Champion, A. G. (2001) A changing demographic regime and evolving polycentric urban regions: Consequences
                                                                     for the size, composition and distribution of city populations, Urban Studies, 38(4), pp. 657–677.
                                                                Cheshire, P. (1999) Trends in sizes and structures of urban areas, in: P. C. Cheshire & E. S. Mills (Eds) Handbook
                                                                     of regional and urban economics, ch. 35, pp. 1339–1373 (Amsterdam: North Holland).
                                                                Combes, P., Duranton, G., Gobillon, L., Puga, D. & Roux, S. (2012) The productivity advantages of large cities:
                                                                     Distinguishing agglomeration from firm selection, Econometrica, 80(6), pp. 2543– 2594.
                                                                Davoudi, S. (2003) Polycentricity in European spatial planning: From an analytical tool to a normative agenda,
                                                                     European Planning Studies, 11(8), pp. 979–999.
                                                                De Goei, B., Burger, M. J. & Van Oort, F. G. (2010) Functional polycentrism and urban network development in
                                                                     the greater south east, United Kingdom: Evidence from Commuting Patterns, 1981–2001, Regional Studies,
                                                                     44(9), pp. 1149– 1170.
                                                                Dieleman, F. M. & Faludi, A. (1998) Polynucleated metropolitan regions in Northwest Europe: Theme of the
                                                                     special issue, European Planning Studies, 6(4), pp. 365– 377.
                                                                Dijkstra, L., Garcilazo, E. & McCann, P. (2013) The economic performance of European cities and city-regions:
                                                                     Myths and realities, European Planning Studies, 21(3), pp. 334–354.
                                                                Duranton, G. (2007) Urban evolutions: The fast, the slow, and the still, American Economic Review, 97(1),
                                                                     pp. 197– 221.
                                                                Duranton, G. & Puga, D. (2004) Microfoundations of urban agglomeration economies, in: J. V. Henderson & J. F.
                                                                     Thisse (Eds) Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, ed. 1, vol. 4, chap. 48, pp. 2063–2117 (Amster-
                                                                     dam: North Holland).
                                                                Eeckhout, J. (2004) Gibrat’s law for (all) cities, American Economic Review, 94(5), pp. 1429–1451.
                                                                ESDP. (1999) Towards Balanced and Sustainable Development of the Territory of the EU. Presented at the Infor-
                                                                     mal Meeting of Ministers Responsible for Spatial Planning of the Member States of the European Union,
                                                                     Postdam.
                                                                ESPON 3.1. (2003) From Project Results to “ESPON Results”. A Draft Guidance paper Prepared by ESPON 3.1.
                                                                     Federal Office for Building and Regional Planning, Bonn.
                                                                Frey, H. (1999) Designing the City. Towards a More Sustainable Form (London: E&FN Spon).
                                                                Gabaix, X. (1999) Zipf’s law for cities: An explanation, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(3), pp. 739– 767.
                                                                                                         Assessing Polycentric Urban Systems in the OECD                     17

                                                                Gabaix, X. & Ioannides, Y. M. (2004) The evolution of city size distributions, in: J. V. Henderson & J. F. Thisse
                                                                     (Eds) Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, ch. 53, pp. 2341– 2378 (Amsterdam: North Holland).
                                                                Garcı́a López, M. A. & Muñiz, I. (2013) Urban spatial structure, agglomeration economies, and economic growth
                                                                     in Barcelona: An intra-metropolitan perspective, Papers in Regional Science, 92(3), pp. 515– 534. doi:10.
                                                                     1111/j.1435-5957.2011.00409.x
                                                                Glaeser, E. L. & Kahn, M. E. (2004) Sprawl and urban growth, in: V. Henderson & J. F. Thisse (Eds) Handbook of
                                                                     Regional and Urban Economics, Vol. 4, Chap. 56, pp. 2481– 2527 (Amsterdam: North Holland).
                                                                Glaeser, E. L., Kolko, J. & Saiz, A. (2001) Consumer city, Journal of Economic Geography, 1(1), pp. 27–50.
                                                                Green, N. (2007) Functional polycentricity: A formal definition in terms of social network analysis, Urban
                                                                     Studies, 44(11), pp. 2077– 2103.
                                                                Hsu, W.-T. (2012) Central place theory and city size distribution, The Economic Journal, 122(563), pp. 903– 932.
                                                                Kloosterman, R. C. & Musterd, S. (2001) The polycentric urban region: Towards a research agenda, Urban
                                                                     Studies, 38(4), pp. 623 –633.
                                                                Lang, R. E. (2003) Edgeless Cities: Exploring the Elusive Metropolis (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution
                                                                     Press).
                                                                Meijers, E. & Burger, M. J. (2010) Spatial structure and productivity in US metropolitan areas, Environment and




Downloaded by [Selcuk Universitesi] at 12:58 07 February 2015
                                                                     planning A, 42(6), pp. 1383– 1402.
                                                                Meijers, E. & Sandberg, S. (2008) Reducing regional disparities by means of polycentric development: Panacea
                                                                     or Placebo, Scienze Regionali, 7(2), pp. 71–96.
                                                                Mills, E. S. (1972) Studies in the Structure of the Urban Economy (Baltimore, MD: John Hopkins Press).
                                                                Modarres, A. (2011) Polycentricity, commuting pattern, urban form: The case of Southern California, Inter-
                                                                     national Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 35(6), pp. 1193–1211.
                                                                Muth, R. (1969) Cities and Housing (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
                                                                Nordregio. (2005) Potentials for Polycentric Development in Europe. ESPON Final Report 1.1.1, Luxembourg.
                                                                OECD. (2012a) Redefining “Urban”. A New Way to Measure Metropolitan Areas (Paris: OECD Publishing).
                                                                OECD. (2012b) Compact City Policies. A Comparative Assessment (Paris: OECD Publishing).
                                                                OECD. (2013a) Regions at a Glance (Paris: OECD Publishing).
                                                                OECD. (2013b) Rural-Urban Partnerships: An Integrated Approach to Economic Development (Paris: OECD
                                                                     Publishing).
                                                                Parkinson, M., Meegan, R. & Karecha, J. (2014) City size and economic performance: Is bigger better, small
                                                                     more beautiful or middling marvellous? European Planning Studies. doi:10.1080/09654313.2014.904998
                                                                Parr, J. B. (2002) Agglomeration economies: Ambiguities and confusions, Environment and Planning A, 34(4),
                                                                     pp. 717– 731.
                                                                Parr, J. B. (2004) The polycentric urban region: A closer inspection, Regional Studies, 38(3), pp. 231 –240.
                                                                Priemus, H. (1994) Planning the randstad between economic growth and sustainability, Urban Studies, 31(3),
                                                                     pp. 509– 534.
                                                                Riguelle, F., Thomas, I. & Verhetsel, A. (2007) Measuring urban polycentrism: A European case study and its
                                                                     implications, Journal of Economic Geography, 7(2), pp. 193– 215.
                                                                Rosenthal, S. & Strange, W. C. (2004) Evidence on the nature and sources of agglomeration economies, in: J. V.
                                                                     Henderson & J. F. Thisse (Eds) Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Ed. 1, Vol. 4, Chapt. 49,
                                                                     pp. 2119–2171 (Amsterdam: North Holland).
                                                                Schwanen, T., Dieleman, F. M. & Dijst, M. (2004) The impact of metropolitan structure on commute behavior in
                                                                     the Netherlands: A multilevel approach, Growth and Change, 35(3), pp. 304–333.
                                                                Vandermotten, C., Roelandts, M. & Cornut, P. (2007) European polycentrism: Towards a more efficient and/or
                                                                     more equitable development? in: N. Cattan (Eds) Cities and Networks in Europe. A Critical Approach of
                                                                     Polycentrism, pp. 51–64 (Mountrouge: John Libbey Eurotext).
                                                                Veneri, P. (2010) Urban polycentricity and the costs of commuting: Evidence from Italian metropolitan areas,
                                                                     Growth and Change, 41(3), pp. 403– 429.
                                                                Veneri, P. (2013a) The identification of sub-centres in two Italian metropolitan areas: A functional approach,
                                                                     Cities, 31, pp. 167–175.
                                                                Veneri, P. (2013b) On City-Size Distribution: Evidence from OECD Functional Urban Areas. OECD Regional
                                                                     Development Working Papers 2013/27, OECD Publishing.
                                                                Veneri, P. & Burgalassi, D. (2011) Spatial Structure and Productivity in Italian NUTS-3 Regions. Working Papers
                                                                     of the Department of Economics n. 364, Marche Polytechnic University, Ancona, Italy.
                                                                Veneri, P. & Burgalassi, D. (2012) Questioning polycentric development and its effects. Issues definition and
                                                                     measurement for the Italian NUTS-2 regions, European Planning Studies, 20(6), pp. 1017–1037.
                                                                18    M. Brezzi & P. Veneri

                                                                Wegener, M. (2013) Polycentric Europe: More Efficient, more Equitable and more Sustainable? Paper presented
                                                                    at the International Seminar on Welfare and competitiveness in the European polycentric urban structure,
                                                                    Florence 7 June 2013.
                                                                White, M. J. (1999) Urban areas with decentralised employment: Theory and empirical work, in: E. S. Mills &
                                                                    P. Cheshire (Eds) Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, pp. 1375– 1412 (Amsterdam: Elsevier
                                                                    Science).




Downloaded by [Selcuk Universitesi] at 12:58 07 February 2015
