[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: journal/B08-cardoso-meijers-2017-secondary-yet-metropolitan-the-challenges-of-metropolitan-integration-for-second-tier-cities-10.1080-14649357.2017.1371789.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Title:           Secondary Yet Metropolitan? The Challenges of Metropolitan Integration for Second-Tier Cities
Subject:         Planning Theory & Practice, 2017. doi:10.1080/14649357.2017.1371789
Keywords:        Second-tier cities; metropolitan regions; metropolitan integration; European urban system; agglomeration benefits
Author:          Rodrigo V. Cardoso
Creator:         Adobe InDesign CC 2015 (Windows)
Producer:        iText 4.2.0 by 1T3XT
CreationDate:    Sat Oct  7 18:04:58 2017 WIB
ModDate:         Wed Oct 18 00:09:47 2017 WIB
Custom Metadata: no
Metadata Stream: yes
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            AcroForm
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           21
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       634.32 x 833.04 pts
Page rot:        0
File size:       1825690 bytes
Optimized:       no
PDF version:     1.4
[Extracted Text]
                       Planning Theory & Practice




                       ISSN: 1464-9357 (Print) 1470-000X (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rptp20




                Secondary Yet Metropolitan? The Challenges of
                Metropolitan Integration for Second-Tier Cities

                Rodrigo V. Cardoso & Evert J. Meijers

                To cite this article: Rodrigo V. Cardoso & Evert J. Meijers (2017): Secondary Yet Metropolitan?
                The Challenges of Metropolitan Integration for Second-Tier Cities, Planning Theory & Practice,
                DOI: 10.1080/14649357.2017.1371789

                To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14649357.2017.1371789




                        © 2017 The Author(s). Published by Informa
                        UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
                        Group

                        Published online: 10 Oct 2017.



                        Submit your article to this journal



                        Article views: 70



                        View related articles



                        View Crossmark data




                                       Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
                              http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rptp20

Download by: [Eastern Michigan University]                                                                  Date: 17 October 2017, At: 10:09
                                                                       Planning Theory & Practice, 2017
                                                                       https://doi.org/10.1080/14649357.2017.1371789


                                                                                                                                                                                  OPEN ACCESS

                                                                       Secondary Yet Metropolitan? The Challenges of Metropolitan
                                                                       Integration for Second-Tier Cities
                                                                       Rodrigo V. Cardoso and Evert J. Meijers
                                                                       OTB – Research for the Built Environment, Faculty of Architecture and the Built Environment, Delft University of Technology,
                                                                       Delft, the Netherlands




Downloaded by [Eastern Michigan University] at 10:09 17 October 2017
                                                                           ABSTRACT                                                                                                             ARTICLE HISTORY
                                                                           This paper discusses whether the areas where metropolitan integration can be                                         Received 19 December 2016
                                                                           beneficial for cities in general corresponds to the typical areas of disadvantage                                    Accepted 22 August 2017
                                                                           of many second-tier cities in Europe, and explores the implications of that                                          KEYWORDS
                                                                           convergence. Metropolitan integration entails functional, institutional and                                          Second-tier cities;
                                                                           symbolic dimensions, whose potential advantages include exploiting the                                               metropolitan regions;
                                                                           agglomeration benefits emerging from the metropolitan scale, efficiently                                             metropolitan integration;
                                                                           deploying shared metropolitan resources, and acquiring political-institutional                                       European urban system;
                                                                           influence over higher-level policymaking. Research shows that many European                                          agglomeration benefits
                                                                           second-tier cities face persistent disadvantages in comparison to first-tier cities
                                                                           in these areas, and this article contributes to the discussion of new strategies of
                                                                           second-tier city development by exploring the potential effect of metropolitan
                                                                           integration in overcoming these setbacks. We empirically assess the gains
                                                                           in demographic and functional mass experienced by second-tier cities by
                                                                           aggregating the metropolitan scale, and draw from various examples to illustrate
                                                                           their interest in increasing institutional and political capacity. Metropolitan
                                                                           region formation seems indeed a promising strategy for many second-tier cities,
                                                                           especially those embedded in large and dense urban territories, and located
                                                                           in countries with a dominant first-tier city. To mobilise this potential, the paper
                                                                           further discusses the planning and governance strategies that can best manage
                                                                           the opportunities and hurdles of a metropolitan integration process.


                                                                       Second-Tier Cities Rediscovered
                                                                       There is a renewed interest in second-tier cities in Europe. Policymakers, researchers and specialist
                                                                       media are widening their narrow focus on the largest cities in favour of a more diverse typology of
                                                                       second-tier cities. They are promoted as business and tourism destinations as well as places to live
                                                                       and work, as an alternative to overcrowded and expensive capitals (Grant Thornton, 2015; National
                                                                       Geographic Traveller, 2014). Second-tier cities are defined here as non-capital cities, mostly medi-
                                                                       um-sized, “whose economic and social performance is sufficiently important to affect the potential
                                                                       performance of the national economy” (ESPON/SGPTD, 2012, p. 3). While they usually lack ‘command
                                                                       and control’ functions at higher spatial scales (Hodos, 2011), they are nonetheless important nodes
                                                                       of the European urban system. Several recent policy reports stress the need to invest in second-tier
                                                                       cities to rebalance territorial development and improve the national economic performance, mainly

                                                                       CONTACT Rodrigo V. Cardoso               r.o.v.cardoso@tudelft.nl
                                                                       © 2017 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group.
                                                                       This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which
                                                                       permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
                                                                       2     ﻿R. V. CARDOSO AND E. J. MEIJERS


                                                                       in countries where the capital city (or a ‘first-tier’ city, even if not a national capital; both terms appear
                                                                       here as synonyms) dominates the economic and political life (Dijkstra, 2013; ESPON/SGPTD, 2012;
                                                                       Martin, Pike, Tyler, & Gardiner, 2015; OECD, 2012).
                                                                           The advantages of developing counterweights to single dominant cities have been discussed for
                                                                       decades, starting with the French métropoles d’équilibre in the 1960s, and have gained traction across
                                                                       Europe, from the solid tradition of powerful regional capitals in Germany to the self-styled Core Cities
                                                                       group that emerged in the 1990s in the UK. And yet, recent research shows that the fortunes of sec-
                                                                       ond-tier cities vary greatly among and within European countries (Dijkstra, Garcilazo, & McCann, 2013).
                                                                       They are influenced by their location in relation to European core economic areas or international
                                                                       economic corridors (Faludi, 2015; Kunzmann & Wegener, 1991), but also by the hierarchical or decen-
                                                                       tralised structure of the different national urban systems. The decentralisation of power, resources
                                                                       and investments influences the extent to which a country enjoys a “powerful multi-cylinder economic




Downloaded by [Eastern Michigan University] at 10:09 17 October 2017
                                                                       engine” (ESPON/SGPTD, 2012, p. 23) consisting of a range of strong cities. However, in many countries
                                                                       investments and policies tilt visibly towards capital cities, and growing gaps between them and sec-
                                                                       ond-tier cities are visible in various economic, functional and institutional capacity indicators (BBSR,
                                                                       2011; ESPON/SGPTD, 2012).
                                                                           Second-tier cities also seem more volatile than capitals in their reaction to broader economic cir-
                                                                       cumstances. Recent research shows that most of them, even those which had flourished in previous
                                                                       years, suffered greater GDP falls during the economic crisis of 2008–2010 than capitals, which were
                                                                       largely protected from extreme drops (Parkinson, Meegan, & Karecha, 2015). However, they have also
                                                                       been more agile to recover after 2013, and a recent European Grouping on Territorial Cooperation
                                                                       (ESPON) update on the matter shows many second-tier cities in Europe growing again faster than
                                                                       their capitals (ESPON, 2016).
                                                                           These trends are visible, at least partly, in second-tier cities in different contexts, suggesting that
                                                                       there are common factors shaping their development options and relations to national ‘first-tier’ cities.
                                                                       When that relation is visibly unbalanced, as in the more centralised urban systems, the literature refers
                                                                       to disadvantages in the available paths to second-tier city development. The most pressing include (1)
                                                                       a weaker ability than their larger counterparts to reap the benefits of urban agglomeration due to their
                                                                       smaller size, and, quite often, lack of important urban functions (BBSR, 2011; Cardoso & Meijers, 2016),
                                                                       (2) neglect in the reception of public investment aimed at increasing competitiveness (Crouch & Le
                                                                       Galès, 2012; Kresl & Ietri, 2016), and (3) lack of political influence on higher-level (national or European)
                                                                       policymaking (ESPON/SGPTD, 2012). Such setbacks reveal hierarchical, ‘first-city’ biases embedded in
                                                                       the long history of urban Europe (Hohenberg, 2004), justifying an assessment of the reasons for their
                                                                       persistency and the strategies to mitigate them. While the analysis that follows addresses European
                                                                       second-tier cities in general, this paper is particularly concerned with those where a combination
                                                                       of geographical, political and economic circumstances makes them experience these disadvantages
                                                                       more strongly.
                                                                           Many researchers have noted that a new strategic space to address urban problems has emerged
                                                                       at the metropolitan region scale. As cities coalesce into vast and interconnected urban territories,
                                                                       the relevance of that scale to organise their economic activity, governance scope, functional assets
                                                                       and planning strategies becomes clear (Balducci, Fedeli, & Pasqui, 2011; Salet, Vermeulen, Savini, &
                                                                       Dembski, 2015; Savini, 2012). Tighter functional and institutional integration of metropolitan regions
                                                                       is advocated as a generally desirable strategy for several reasons, including exploiting the benefits of a
                                                                       greater demographic mass, organising a larger and more diverse array of urban functions, enhancing
                                                                       governance capacity in issues that mobilise the metropolitan scale, and becoming more competitive
                                                                       in international rankings.
                                                                                                                                                PLANNING THEORY & PRACTICE﻿      3


                                                                           The aim of this paper is to discuss whether the areas where metropolitan integration can benefit
                                                                       cities in general overlap with the areas where many European second-tier cities tend to experience
                                                                       persistent setbacks in comparison to first-tier cities. In the next section we define integration and
                                                                       summarise its potential benefits for metropolitan regions. Then we address some typical disadvan-
                                                                       tages of European second-tier cities and analyse how metropolitan integration can contribute to over-
                                                                       come them. The argument will focus first on the relative increases in population and urban functions
                                                                       achieved by integrating the metropolitan scale, thereby capturing greater benefits of agglomeration
                                                                       when compared to individual centres. It will then refer to the ability of metropolitan regions to act
                                                                       as large and coordinated entities, to become more efficient in the use of metropolitan resources and
                                                                       acquire a louder political voice at higher decision-making levels. We draw from existing evidence
                                                                       and illustrative examples to explore whether those latent benefits can give second-tier metropolitan
                                                                       regions a particular incentive to strengthen their integration. But this reveals only a potential which




Downloaded by [Eastern Michigan University] at 10:09 17 October 2017
                                                                       needs a case-by-case strategy to be realised, and the subsequent section discusses the planning and
                                                                       governance approaches managing the paths to integration in second-tier metropolitan regions, linking
                                                                       our arguments to broader scholarly debates. We finish with conclusions and suggestions for research.


                                                                       The Benefits and Challenges of Metropolitan Integration
                                                                       A process of metropolitan integration is defined here as the extent to which different places within
                                                                       each other’s potential sphere of influence knit together and interact. It involves a spatial-functional
                                                                       dimension based on complementary economic specialisations and functions in different places and
                                                                       the existence of efficient networks between them (Batten, 1995; Meijers, 2008), a political-institutional
                                                                       dimension, formalised by metropolitan governance structures and inter-municipal cooperation net-
                                                                       works (Feiock, 2007; Lefèvre, 1998), and a symbolic-cultural dimension, supported by processes of
                                                                       metropolitan identity-building and the expansion of individual place attachments to the metropolitan
                                                                       scale (Kübler, 2016).
                                                                           From an agglomeration economics perspective, the importance of metropolitan regions also comes
                                                                       from the notion that the continuous concentration of activity in single, large centres produces increas-
                                                                       ingly negative returns (Camagni, Capello, & Caragliu, 2016), and therefore other ways to capture the
                                                                       benefits of agglomeration, emerging from dense clusters of sharing, matching and learning (Duranton
                                                                       & Puga, 2004), must be tested. Alternative proposals explore the advantages of strong networks of
                                                                       cities in larger polycentric spaces (Batten, 1995; Van Oort, Burger, & Raspe, 2010), as well as the rise of
                                                                       ‘agglomeration externality fields’. This is a shift from a nodal to a zonal conception of the spatial organ-
                                                                       isation of agglomeration benefits, now seen as a field of varying intensity covering large geographical
                                                                       areas where different places can mutually ‘borrow size’ but the costs of overconcentration are mitigated
                                                                       (Burger & Meijers, 2016; Phelps, Fallon, & Williams, 2001).
                                                                           To organise the spread out potentials of this renewed ‘urban field’ concept (Friedmann & Miller,
                                                                       1965) for the benefit of citizens, communities and firms, deeper functional and political integration
                                                                       of metropolitan regions becomes a promising development strategy. Its promise relies on two main
                                                                       arguments, arguably relevant for all cities:

                                                                          • First, the potential advantages of exploiting a large and well-connected demographic and func-
                                                                             tional mass, following the positive associations between urban size and economic productivity
                                                                             (Combes & Gobillon, 2015; Melo, Graham, & Noland, 2009), and between the presence of urban
                                                                             functions and attractiveness for firms and population; functional performance is indeed one of
                                                                       4      ﻿R. V. CARDOSO AND E. J. MEIJERS


                                                                              the key agglomerative advantages triggered by size, mainly in the case of consumer amenities
                                                                              (Burger, Meijers, Hoogerbrugge, & Treserra, 2015; Glaeser, Kolko, & Saiz, 2001).
                                                                           • Second, the chance to increase governance capacity by lowering institutional fragmentation and
                                                                              upscaling joint agency. This serves both to organise shared metropolitan resources (Albrechts,
                                                                              Healey, & Kunzmann, 2003; Meijers & Romein, 2003) and to gain political influence in higher gov-
                                                                              ernance levels and networks, from the national to the global scale (METREX, 2014).

                                                                           Integration is considered necessary because simply aggregating the size of several nearby centres
                                                                       does not provide the same level of agglomeration benefits of a single large centre (Meijers, 2008). The
                                                                       cases which do achieve comparable benefits depend on factors which ‘qualify’ that aggregate size as
                                                                       more than the sum of its parts: the ability to build and support networks of all kinds over large scales,
                                                                       coordinate the provision of urban functions among different locations, and connect them efficiently,
                                                                       or develop cooperation between agencies and municipalities overcoming core–periphery hierarchies




Downloaded by [Eastern Michigan University] at 10:09 17 October 2017
                                                                       (Camagni, Capello, & Caragliu, 2015; Savini, 2013; Van Oort et al., 2010).
                                                                           Bringing into action these ‘carriers of integration’ is therefore necessary to unlocking the economic
                                                                       potential of metropolitan regions. Planning strategies play a key role in facilitating or hampering this
                                                                       process, for instance in their ability to mediate institutional relations between core and peripheral
                                                                       places with contrasting socio-economic profiles and interests (Feiock, 2007; Savini, 2012), mobilise
                                                                       human and financial resources to allow the implementation and support of sophisticated planning
                                                                       frameworks (Lefèvre, 1998), or gather citizens, firms and institutions around a persuasive narrative of
                                                                       identity-building, which allows the metropolitan project to evolve from a technocratic exercise into
                                                                       a culturally and symbolically meaningful concept, where actors can ‘anchor’ their different priorities
                                                                       (Hajer, van’t Klooster, & Grijzen, 2010; Salet et al., 2015).
                                                                           However, the different political relations, functional structures and cultural perceptions shaped over
                                                                       time in different types of metropolitan region – for instance, around large, hegemonic capitals and
                                                                       smaller second-tier cities – are likely to create different conditions for these processes to develop. This
                                                                       means that not only the incentive but also the ability to pursue integration varies from city to city, and
                                                                       that the questions about how much integration promotes socio-economic benefits, and what its pre-
                                                                       ferred institutional shape should be, do not have generic answers. The factors which define divergent
                                                                       growth paths for second-tier cities, such as geographical location in privileged economic corridors, the
                                                                       quality of local leadership, the historical legacy of inter-city relations, and the type of national urban
                                                                       systems and spatial planning frameworks, not only differentiate their need to access the benefits of
                                                                       integration, but also constrain what integration can offer them and their partners (Albrechts et al., 2003;
                                                                       Nelles, 2013). Nevertheless, policymakers and planners across Europe seem undeterred and determined
                                                                       to increasingly develop governance agreements and strategic visions aimed at metropolitan ‘upscaling’
                                                                       in order to exploit the promised advantages of integration, adding relevance to this discussion.


                                                                       The Persistent Disadvantages of Second-Tier Cities
                                                                       Second-tier cities were defined by the ESPON/SGPTD report (2012) as cities lacking the economic,
                                                                       demographic and political importance of capitals, but still playing a significant economic and social
                                                                       role in the national context. For the analysis that follows, we select cities from that report, of all sizes
                                                                       and facing all kinds of socio-economic prospects. But, clearly, the setbacks experienced by second-tier
                                                                       cities are more likely to be visible (or to become a problematic issue for planners and strategists to
                                                                       address) further away from privileged economic regions, as well as in urban systems with a dominant
                                                                       capital at the top as in the UK, France, Portugal, Ireland, Hungary or Greece, as ESPON also suggests.
                                                                                                                                                 PLANNING THEORY & PRACTICE﻿      5


                                                                       While providing a measure to this spectrum is beyond the scope of this paper, we assume that the
                                                                       need to overcome existing disadvantages, by metropolitan integration or other means, has different
                                                                       degrees of urgency in different places.
                                                                          While their presence and visibility varies, we can classify the typical drawbacks of second-tier cities
                                                                       in comparison to first-tier cities in two related categories:

                                                                          • The first is in regard to their urban mass, expressed in population size and available urban functions,
                                                                             the related presence of agglomeration benefits and the ability to exploit them.
                                                                          • The second emerges from the historical processes prioritising the growth of first-tier cities and
                                                                             strengthening their political and economic dominance over secondary cities.

                                                                          Both dimensions are intertwined in such a way that a virtuous positive development cycle can
                                                                       develop for many first-tier cities, but many second-tier cities risk a downward development cycle.




Downloaded by [Eastern Michigan University] at 10:09 17 October 2017
                                                                       The next two sections will present these two areas of disadvantage in detail and discuss whether the
                                                                       potential benefits of metropolitan integration may have a particularly positive effect in mitigating
                                                                       them. This potential will then be framed from a planning perspective, discussing the role of planning
                                                                       strategies in mobilising metropolitan resources, dealing with complexity and managing intra-metro-
                                                                       politan relations as a way to manage this process.


                                                                       Urban Mass and the Effects of Metropolitan Integration
                                                                       Large cities thrive on agglomeration economies based on ‘sharing, matching and learning’, mechanisms,
                                                                       which tend to be proxied with size and density. Second-tier cities are by definition smaller, thus enjoy-
                                                                       ing fewer agglomeration benefits of this kind, but are also often unable even to build upon their scale
                                                                       proportionately as much as first-tier cities. Throughout the history of urban Europe, a feedback loop
                                                                       between the clustering of political and economic power reinforced the ‘fusion at the top’ of major urban
                                                                       functions in capital cities (Hohenberg, 2004). Functional performance is one of the main agglomeration
                                                                       benefits triggered by size, and this process boosted the ability of capitals to profit from agglomeration
                                                                       beyond differences in size, increasing the gap to other cities in the urban system.
                                                                          This gap is visible today in the presence of urban functions in first-tier and second-tier cities. A study
                                                                       by the BBSR - German Federal Institute for Research on Building, Urban Affairs and Spatial Development
                                                                       of 125 European metropolitan areas includes a map (BBSR, 2011, p. 104) showing the agglomerations
                                                                       which have fewer urban functions than their demographic size would predict, given the compara-
                                                                       tive index values of all metropolitan areas. The study is based on a selection of top-level functions in
                                                                       five areas: politics, economy, science, transport and culture. Most cities in this condition are indeed
                                                                       second-tiers (together with some Eastern European capitals): Manchester but not London, Lyon but
                                                                       not Paris, Porto but not Lisbon. Cardoso and Meijers (2016) use this database to compare the func-
                                                                       tional performance of first-tier and second-tier cities and conclude that the former do benefit from
                                                                       a surplus that cannot be rationalised by size differences or a variety of other control variables, and is
                                                                       best explained by a ‘first city bias’ in the location patterns of important functions. Since the presence
                                                                       of amenities and other functions is a key factor of attractiveness for households and firms (Chen &
                                                                       Rosenthal, 2008; Glaeser & Gottlieb, 2006), cities hosting an insufficient functional array and diversity
                                                                       are likely to have a disadvantage in this respect.
                                                                          In response, many cities and regions actively aim to increase their demographic and functional
                                                                       mass to better reap the benefits of agglomeration, while trying to avoid the diseconomies of exces-
                                                                       sive concentration in single centres. Integration policies, through which a larger existing urban mass
                                                                       can be contained in a coordinated and connected metropolitan space, offer a potential way forward.
                                                                       6        ﻿R. V. CARDOSO AND E. J. MEIJERS


                                                                          Comparing the wider metropolitan regions of first-tier and second-tier cities reveals some remark-
                                                                       able differences, both in demographic and functional terms. For the analysis below we started with
                                                                       the list of 26 first-tier cities and 124 second-tier cities provided by ESPON/SGPTD (2012). We then
                                                                       excluded all second-tier cities which are not part of the BBSR study of urban functions (2011) men-
                                                                       tioned earlier, as they do not provide data for the functional performance comparison. We further
                                                                       excluded second-tier cities which fall in the BBSR-defined metro area of a larger first-tier city, as well as
                                                                       the correspondent first-tier cities (e.g. Rotterdam and Amsterdam, Malmo and Copenhagen, Antwerp
                                                                       and Brussels) to enable meaningful comparisons. Zurich was used instead of Bern as a first-tier city,
                                                                       given its national economic importance. Capitals in countries with no second-tier cities were excluded
                                                                       (Reykjavik, Luxembourg, Nicosia, Valetta). Cities whose GDP is higher than the capital were not con-
                                                                       sidered second-tier; this was the case for Milan, Munich, Frankfurt and Hamburg. In the end, we focus
                                                                       on 22 first-tier and 71 second-tier cities (see Table 1).




Downloaded by [Eastern Michigan University] at 10:09 17 October 2017
                                                                       Population Growth
                                                                       We can analyse whether the potential gains from metropolitan integration in terms of added population
                                                                       are generally larger for second-tier than for first-tier cities. This was signalled by ESPON research (ESPON,
                                                                       2005), which analysed European functional urban regions and defined accessibility areas around them,
                                                                       which could provide important growth potential if ‘polycentric integration policies’ were followed
                                                                       (called PUSH and PIA areas.1 That potential was deemed small for the largest cities, due to their already
                                                                       dominant role in the region, suggesting the existence of strong core–periphery contrasts in terms of
                                                                       population and economic activity. But the gains were considered very significant for the majority of
                                                                       medium-sized cities, as their accessibility areas contained a higher relative proportion of population,
                                                                       and they would have greater interest in integrating with these surroundings to capture the benefits
                                                                       of a larger demographic mass with ‘sharing, matching and learning’ potentials. Second-tier cities such
                                                                       as Genoa, Montpellier, Nuremberg or Strasbourg were at the top of the list of potential winners.


                                                                       Table 1. List of 22 first-tier and 71 second-tier cities used in the analysis.
                                                                       First-tier cities                                                  Second-tier cities
                                                                       Athens                        Aarhus                  Genoa                  Manchester    Turin
                                                                       Berlin                        Bari                    Ghent                  Mannheim      Toulon
                                                                       Bucharest                     Basle                   Glasgow                Maribor       Toulouse
                                                                       Budapest                      Belfast                 Göteborg               Marseilles    Valencia
                                                                        Dublin                       Bergen                  Graz                   Metz          Wroclaw
                                                                       Helsinki                      Bielefeld               Grenoble               Montpellier
                                                                       Copenhagen                    Bilbao                  Hanover                Nantes
                                                                       Lisbon                        Birmingham              Innsbruck              Naples
                                                                       Ljubljana                     Bologna                 Katowice               Newcastle
                                                                       London                        Bordeaux                Cologne                Nice
                                                                       Madrid                        Bremen                  Krakow                 Nottingham
                                                                       Oslo                          Brescia                 Lausanne               Nuremberg
                                                                       Paris                         Bristol                 Leeds                  Odense
                                                                       Prague                        Brno                    Leicester              Palermo
                                                                       Riga                          Cardiff                 Leipzig                Porto
                                                                       Rome                          Cork                    Lens                   Poznan
                                                                       Sofia                         Dresden                 Liège                  Salerno
                                                                       Stockholm                     Düsseldorf              Lille                  Salzburg
                                                                       Tallinn                       Edinburgh               Linz                   Seville
                                                                       Vilnius                       Eindhoven               Liverpool              Sheffield
                                                                       Warsaw                        Florence                Lyon                   Strasbourg
                                                                       Zurich                        Geneva                  Malaga                 Stuttgart
                                                                                                                                                             PLANNING THEORY & PRACTICE﻿           7


                                                                           Using the list of first-tier and second-tier cities listed in Table 1, we compared the relative increase
                                                                       in terms of population between various territorial delimitations developed by ESPON (2007) and BBSR
                                                                       (2011). The purpose was to see whether second-tier cities have proportionally more to gain than first-
                                                                       tier cities from capturing the spread out demographic potential of the surrounding region.
                                                                           Figure 1 illustrates the population difference between the contiguous built-up area of the core city,
                                                                       referred to as the morphological urban area (MUA)2 (ESPON, 2007) and the larger metropolitan area (MA),
                                                                       as defined by BBSR (based on areas with 60-minute accessibility to clusters of top-level metropolitan
                                                                       functions; see BBSR, 2011, for details). The vertical axis indicates the proportional increase, obtained
                                                                       simply by dividing the population of the MA by the population of the MUA. The horizontal axis distin-
                                                                       guishes between first-tier and second-tier cities. We find that second-tier cities consistently have greater
                                                                       increases than first-tier cities, with cities in polycentric urban regions with other second-tiers nearby
                                                                       emerging as outliers. This is the case for Düsseldorf, Cardiff and Maribor. Ljubljana and Zurich are the




Downloaded by [Eastern Michigan University] at 10:09 17 October 2017
                                                                       only relative outliers among first-tier cities. But even calculating the median values, to avoid the effect of
                                                                       these exceptions, second-tier cities, with a median of 3.35, outperform first-tiers, which only reach 1.53.




                                                                       Figure 1. Metropolitan population potential: increase in population through integration with surrounding metro
                                                                       area in first-tier and second-tier cities (relative to MUA size). Median value first-tier cities (n = 22): 1.78 / Median value
                                                                       second-tier cities (n = 71): 3.35. Not depicted: Salerno (second-tier city, increase ratio 28.6x).
                                                                       8     ﻿R. V. CARDOSO AND E. J. MEIJERS


                                                                          This is a robust finding, as other metropolitan delimitations yield confirmatory results. If we take
                                                                       the population mass of the smaller Functional Urban Area (FUA) definition provided by ESPON (2007),
                                                                       based on travel-to-work areas, and also compare it to the MUA, we observe a median increase ratio for
                                                                       second-tier cities of 1.77, while first-tier cities reach 1.22. While an upper limit to the territorial scales
                                                                       with integrative potential should be considered, so that functional and institutional integration policies
                                                                       remain viable and cultural integration factors remain meaningful, this suggests that second-tier cities
                                                                       may have even more to gain from integration at higher spatial scales, namely when other important
                                                                       centres can contribute to form a larger metropolitan entity.


                                                                       Functional Performance
                                                                       A similar story can be told about the potential to gather important urban functions spread across the




Downloaded by [Eastern Michigan University] at 10:09 17 October 2017
                                                                       metropolitan region. As mentioned earlier, the report on European metropolitan areas by the BBSR
                                                                       (2011) shows many second-tier cities enjoying fewer top-level urban functions than their size would
                                                                       suggest. However, research by Cardoso and Meijers (2016) finds that the regions around second-tier
                                                                       cities also tend to be better served by important functions than in the case of first-tier cities, suggesting
                                                                       that second-tiers need access to those functions to host a relevant functional array. First-tier cities, in
                                                                       contrast, tend to over-concentrate top-level functions in the core, projecting a functional ‘agglomer-
                                                                       ation shadow’ over the surroundings.
                                                                           Figure 2 illustrates the potential gains, in terms of functional performance, of integration with higher
                                                                       spatial scales. Here we use the aforementioned data set developed by the BBSR (2011) which provides
                                                                       a functional index for each Local Administrative Unit (formerly known as NUTS 5) (LAU2) unit in Europe.
                                                                       This index can then be aggregated for any given scale, meaning that we can derive the functional
                                                                       performance for single cities or larger metropolitan regions. We compare again the second-tier and
                                                                       first-tier cities presented in Table 1. All forms of calculation are analogous to Figure 1.
                                                                           Once more, second-tier cities have higher proportional gains than first-tier cities. The outliers are
                                                                       relatively small cities in metropolitan regions with larger second-tiers, such as Toulon (near Marseilles)
                                                                       or Lens (near Lille). In those cases, greater integration might in the end benefit the functional mass
                                                                       commanded by those larger cities rather than their smaller partners. However, as in the case of pop-
                                                                       ulation, the median values (1.78 versus 1.07 in first-tier cities) show a consistent advantage for sec-
                                                                       ond-tier cities of all sizes throughout Europe. A likely explanation is that, rather than the functional
                                                                       ‘agglomeration shadow’ projected by the larger cities over their surroundings, different centres across
                                                                       second-tier metropolitan regions may be able to ‘borrow size’ from the aggregate scale, and have the
                                                                       opportunity to develop functions (namely those still missing in larger centres) which they would not
                                                                       host in isolation or near a functionally too-encompassing core city. This implies greater interdepend-
                                                                       ence between places and encourages integration strategies to organise the potential functional array.


                                                                       Political and Institutional Capacity and the Effects of Metropolitan Integration
                                                                       A related set of disadvantages common to many second-tier cities is in regard to their need to cope
                                                                       with scarce metropolitan resources and their weak political influence at higher government and policy
                                                                       levels. Stronger integration can play a role in mitigating these setbacks, by developing greater institu-
                                                                       tional and political capacity, and the question is whether second-tier cities would have a greater need
                                                                       to pursue it, in comparison to first-tier cities. This will be discussed by drawing from existing literature
                                                                       and relevant examples.
                                                                                                                                                          PLANNING THEORY & PRACTICE﻿          9




Downloaded by [Eastern Michigan University] at 10:09 17 October 2017
                                                                       Figure 2. Metropolitan functional potential: increase in metropolitan functions through integration with surrounding
                                                                       metro area in first-tier and second-tier cities (relative to MUA functional performance index). Median value first-tier
                                                                       cities (n = 22): 1.24 / Median value second-tier cities (n = 71): 1.78. Not depicted: Maribor (second-tier, increase 43x),
                                                                       Toulon (second-tier, increase 22x).

                                                                       Regional Organising Capacity
                                                                       The feedback loop favouring ‘fusion at the top’ in large capitals can be traced back to historical efforts
                                                                       by nation states to prioritise their growth and strengthen their political dominance (Hohenberg, 2004),
                                                                       with capitals accumulating power and investment while the political intervention space of other cities
                                                                       was reduced. Today, as the ability of governments to plan the economic future of cities and regions
                                                                       decreases, policies emerge favouring the so-called ‘national champion’ cities (Crouch & Le Galès, 2012).
                                                                       Governments direct their influence (e.g. via investment in infrastructure) to ensure the success of
                                                                       those cities which are already more successful and better positioned to compete globally, providing
                                                                       potentially higher returns. These are likely to be the largest national cities, as illustrated by Crouch &
                                                                       Le Gales with examples from London and Paris. These policies divert investment streams from other
                                                                       (second-tier) cities, also reducing their attractiveness for firms which could otherwise be matched
                                                                       with optimal city sizes (Dijkstra, 2013), if important public infrastructural investments were in place.
                                                                          The implication is that many cities and regions, namely the ones this paper is concerned with, are
                                                                       faced with a situation where they need to rationalise more consistently their existing resources, as
                                                                       10     ﻿R. V. CARDOSO AND E. J. MEIJERS


                                                                       they are more prone to be overlooked by new investments, for example in transport infrastructure,
                                                                       top-level functions or collective services. Efficiently sharing existing and complementary resources –
                                                                       rather than relying on the addition of new ones – thus becomes a strategy for metropolitan regions to
                                                                       cope with the pressures of scarce (national) public investment (European Communities, 2008; Hulst &
                                                                       Van Montfort, 2007). Capital cities, commanding an oversized amount of resources and likely to expect
                                                                       that the national investment stream is kept, may have a lower incentive to engage in metropolitan
                                                                       integration strategies for the purposes of resource rationalisation.
                                                                           In their study of competitiveness in ‘smaller cities’, Kresl & Ietri similarly stress that when capital
                                                                       cities take the “lion’s share of national urban investment” (Kresl & Ietri, 2016, p. 19) other cities must
                                                                       develop greater marginal efficiency in their use of investment. This includes exploiting the potential
                                                                       of existing resources to serve the larger region rather than a single centre – e.g. a major university or
                                                                       an airport. There are several examples of strategies in second-tier cities following this path: Hodos




Downloaded by [Eastern Michigan University] at 10:09 17 October 2017
                                                                       (2011) describes Manchester Airport as a key economic and symbolic engine driving the affirmation
                                                                       of the city-region scale as a centre of economic power alternative to London. The West of England
                                                                       region (UK) jointly promotes the economic vitality of Bristol, the historic environment of Bath, the
                                                                       quality of universities in both cities, and the economic-industrial nodes in the surrounding region, all
                                                                       joining forces as part of an integrated economic and spatial planning strategy (West of England LEP,
                                                                       2014). Different actors around Lund and Malmo (Sweden) cooperate to brand themselves as a leading
                                                                       ‘knowledge region’ and redevelop large swathes of urban land (a partnership between municipalities
                                                                       and the regional planning authority), taking advantage of the installation of two major EU-funded
                                                                       research laboratories outside Lund.
                                                                           Therefore, a developed organising capacity to share metropolitan resources which may be both
                                                                       sparse and spread out is quite important for second-tier cities. Different organisational forms are avail-
                                                                       able to explore this capacity, and many do not necessarily involve a formal scale of metropolitan
                                                                       government. Meijers, Hoogerbrugge, and Cardoso (in press) have studied the relations between inte-
                                                                       gration and economic performance in European polycentric urban regions and concluded that the
                                                                       presence of any type of entity dedicated to metropolitan policy coordination and the duration of that
                                                                       partnership have a greater positive effect than whether or not it is formalised as a specific government
                                                                       layer. A similar argument is made by Albrechts et al. (2003), namely for the second-tier city-region of
                                                                       Hanover. But if a formal administrative level is not the decisive factor, a sufficient scope and depth in
                                                                       the organisation may well be; a comparison of inter-municipal cooperation by Hulst and Van Montfort
                                                                       (2007) shows that loosely associated ‘spatial planning forums’ and narrow service delivery agreements
                                                                       do not perform as well as wider policy development and coordination organisations as they lack imple-
                                                                       mentation capacity and the ability to override conflicting interests between partners.
                                                                           A certain level of integration seems therefore necessary to sustain regional organising capacity.
                                                                       A progression towards integrated metropolitan planning is visible, for instance, in France. Alongside
                                                                       the political integration driven by the newly created métropoles, communities have long been part of
                                                                       coordinated inter-municipal spatial planning frameworks, such as the schéma de cohérence territoriale
                                                                       (SCOT). Governing infrastructure, natural spaces, housing and employment targets and the provision
                                                                       of collective services, SCOTs aim to increase regional organising capacity between interdependent
                                                                       urban areas, and can define cross-boundary planning objectives. Interestingly, all major cities in France
                                                                       are covered by a metropolitan SCOT, with the telling exception of Paris; actually, the vision of Grand
                                                                       Paris almost as a ‘national identity’ problem creates layers of political complexity that have hampered
                                                                       institutional integration for years (Bourdeau-Lepage, 2013).
                                                                                                                                                   PLANNING THEORY & PRACTICE﻿        11



                                                                       Political Voice
                                                                       The Paris case reflects the way that the nation-state and the capital city scales seem interchangeable,
                                                                       symbolically and politically, and illustrates another typical difference between first-tier and second-tier
                                                                       cities. Especially in politically centralised countries, the voice of the capital city is the voice of the nation,
                                                                       with some literature (e.g. in the UK) pointing out how the centralisation of government institutions
                                                                       in capitals makes politicians reinterpret the interests of the capital city as a proxy for the interests of
                                                                       the nation (Amin, Massey, & Thrift, 2003). Second-tier cities and regions in these contexts may experi-
                                                                       ence corresponding setbacks in terms of political voice, and the question of how to gain influence at
                                                                       higher decision-making levels becomes relevant. The ESPON second-tier cities report (2012) insists on
                                                                       decentralisation of responsibilities and powers, but the challenge for second-tier cities is for them to
                                                                       become powerful political players in order to influence the debates in favour of this decentralisation
                                                                       on the one hand, and to be taken as reliable partners capable of absorbing the new responsibilities




Downloaded by [Eastern Michigan University] at 10:09 17 October 2017
                                                                       and powers, on the other.
                                                                           Several changes in the relations between cities, regions and nation states in recent decades offer
                                                                       some ways forward. Hodos (2011) analyses the demise of national control over the agency of indi-
                                                                       vidual cities in international contexts to propose the concept of “municipal foreign policy”. He argues
                                                                       that “the recent and increasing openness of national urban systems gives greater latitude for direct
                                                                       international linkages on the part of the lesser cities” (Hodos, 2011, p. 6). Faludi (2016) offers a non-ter-
                                                                       ritorial, “neo-medieval” framework to European spatial planning, where different networks of cities
                                                                       and regions define different planning territories, according to needs, objectives and opportunities.
                                                                       This implies that cities of all kinds become powerful actors, able to shape political debates, mobilise
                                                                       resources and throw in the weight of their metropolitan economy. It further implies that metropolitan
                                                                       regions act as coherent entities.
                                                                           Indeed, the ways through which second-tier cities can strengthen their political agency are likely
                                                                       to build upon their demographic, economic and institutional weight. This has been perhaps a less
                                                                       observed potential advantage offered by metropolitan integration compared to the ones discussed
                                                                       earlier. Exploring the case for agglomeration economies in Europe, ESPON researchers enumerate the
                                                                       key features of a favourable policy regime, including “city-regional institutions or networks that seek
                                                                       and achieve significant ‘vertical’ influence, at higher levels of government (regional/national), and are
                                                                       able to shape the policy agenda and encourage policy integration” (ESPON/CAEE, 2010, p. 11). What
                                                                       separates second-tier from first-tier cities here, is that the latter are more likely to achieve these pur-
                                                                       poses without having to rely on wider metropolitan scale. They may have privileged access to higher
                                                                       decision-making levels and policy influence, as well as the economic and demographic weight to push
                                                                       it through (ESPON/SGPTD, 2012).
                                                                           The attempt to reduce these contrasts via deeper integration of second-tier metropolitan regions
                                                                       has been championed in Britain, and is seen as one of the reasons why Manchester pioneered a devo-
                                                                       lution process before other city-regions (Harding, Harloe, & Rees, 2010). First, the integrated actor can
                                                                       advance its size as an argument for attention; its demographic and economic weight just makes it too
                                                                       big to ignore. National and capital city authorities are thus likely to recognise an equal partner, which is
                                                                       a key condition to enabling collaboration based on the perception of symmetrical gains (Feiock, 2007).
                                                                       Second, if that important partner has a track record of collaboration and policy integration, govern-
                                                                       ments are more likely to entrust it with responsibilities and resources. In other regions advancing their
                                                                       size and economy as arguments for greater devolution, the lack of integration as a combined author-
                                                                       ity was seen as an obstacle (Harrison, 2015); and, indeed, six English city-regions progressed to elect
                                                                       combined authority mayors in 2017. The fact that larger agglomerations tend to elect higher-profile
                                                                       12     ﻿R. V. CARDOSO AND E. J. MEIJERS


                                                                       political leaders, who, in turn, have higher positions in national parties and closer ties to national lead-
                                                                       ership, may also contribute to strengthening the role of combined authorities in devolution debates,
                                                                       and suggests a further incentive for second-tier cities to upscale their territory of action.


                                                                       Managing Integration: Planning and Governance Strategies
                                                                       The arguments above regarding the effects of metropolitan integration in second-tier cities reveal
                                                                       a potential whose actual realisation is as differentiated as the historical, political and geographical
                                                                       contexts throughout Europe. This does not exclude, however, that the possibilities advanced here
                                                                       are explored by metropolitan planning and policy authorities for the benefit of their regions. What
                                                                       follows is a discussion about managing the barriers and opportunities for metropolitan integration
                                                                       in second-tier cities. Three links with important planning and governance debates emerge from the




Downloaded by [Eastern Michigan University] at 10:09 17 October 2017
                                                                       discussion. The first relates to the ways to deploy metropolitan functional resources. The second relates
                                                                       to governance complexity in metropolitan regions of different types. The third relates to the strategies
                                                                       to manage the relations between core and periphery locations in these regions.


                                                                       Integrating Functional Regions
                                                                       The previous discussion about size and functions suggests that a conjugation of weaker individual
                                                                       capacity and greater distributed opportunity would give second-tier cities an incentive to capture
                                                                       the demographic and functional potential of the metropolitan region, for instance by developing
                                                                       connective infrastructure and adopting measures to explore synergies between places. But while the
                                                                       incentive is there, second-tier cities may actually be less able to implement such strategies.
                                                                           In a sense, functional integration has actually gone further in first-tier than in second-tier metropol-
                                                                       itan regions. Figure 3 represents, for both population size and urban functions index, the proportion of
                                                                       the BBSR-defined metropolitan area (based on accessibility potential to core functions) considered to
                                                                       be outside the ESPON-defined FUA (based on actual travel-to-work areas). In other words, how much
                                                                       of the accessible metropolitan potential capable of being mobilised to achieve greater agglomeration
                                                                       benefits is not yet integrated into a functionally related area. We refer to the ESPON (2007) and BBSR
                                                                       (2011) definitions and data sets explained earlier. We find that second-tier cities have a larger proportion
                                                                       of non-integrated potential, approximately 44% for population and 38% for urban functions, while
                                                                       first-tier cities leave little potential outside the FUA they already command. Therefore, functional inte-
                                                                       gration strategies are more pressing for second-tier cities also because they have been less successful
                                                                       so far in pursuing them.
                                                                           It is perhaps in the nature of second-tier cities to have a historically weaker influence on the spa-
                                                                       tial-functional organisation of the larger region. Many first-tier cities, such as London, Paris or Madrid,
                                                                       have experienced early centrifugal growth, via vast swathes of suburban expansion, functional relo-
                                                                       cation and infrastructural interventions emanating from the core (Mogridge & Parr, 1997). Together
                                                                       with the political power centred in capitals, these cities exerted a disproportionate influence over the
                                                                       spatial–functional configuration of their surroundings, and were often able to project their growth
                                                                       agenda over a comparatively passive hinterland, providing the context for the tight functional links
                                                                       depicted in Figure 3. By contrast, smaller, ‘weaker’ cities usually experienced more modest growth
                                                                       processes, and their transformation into urban regions may have been less determined by the outward
                                                                       expansion and functional reorganisation of the core, with more autonomous urbanisation processes
                                                                       shaping the territory (Champion, 2001).
                                                                                                                                                     PLANNING THEORY & PRACTICE﻿         13




Downloaded by [Eastern Michigan University] at 10:09 17 October 2017   Figure 3. The non-integrated demographic and functional potential of second-tier and first-tier metropolitan regions.

                                                                           However, that ability of large core cities to determine a hierarchical structure of metropolitan scale
                                                                       also relies on historical policy options which reflect and perpetuate “the traditional perspective of a
                                                                       nested hierarchy with clearly demarked core/periphery” (Thierstein, 2015, p. 257). Today, this approach
                                                                       is insufficient to deploy the resources of whole metropolitan regions, especially when economic, infra-
                                                                       structural and functional assets are not distributed according to a similar hierarchy. Moreover, with
                                                                       the increasing shift from comprehensive, publicly led planning to the ad hoc provision of services and
                                                                       functions driven by complex public–private agreements, the potential effects of planning strategies in
                                                                       predetermining (typically hierarchical) functional arrangements become modest. Strategists should
                                                                       “responsively build on these forces” (Salet et al., 2015, p. 252), rather than controlling them, to make
                                                                       the best of ever-changing locations and relations.
                                                                           This implies abandoning core–periphery and spatially selective assumptions and addressing the
                                                                       heterogeneity of the whole urban territory. The ways to achieve it suggest new planning directions
                                                                       for cities with a history of weak hierarchical command over the development of their urban region. A
                                                                       variety of proposals have reflected this view, such as the ‘City of Cities’ strategy for Milan by Balducci
                                                                       et al. (2011). There, the entire urban region is conceived as the ‘city’ for intervention, meaning that the
                                                                       14     ﻿R. V. CARDOSO AND E. J. MEIJERS


                                                                       features and expectations formerly assumed to belong to ‘proper’ cities (quality of the built environ-
                                                                       ment, amenities, public transport, infrastructure, etc.) were reconceptualised for the metropolitan scale.
                                                                       The purpose was to ensure ‘liveability’ for people and business at any point of the territory, rather than
                                                                       in a selection of predefined centres.
                                                                          The approach to integrated planning in urban regions working to deploy their larger metropolitan
                                                                       resources, such as the West of England, mentioned earlier, but also in Turin, Lyon or Manchester, also
                                                                       seems to align with this view that the urban assets and qualities are multi-centric and the core city is
                                                                       just a particular configuration of a larger and more relevant urban form. While hierarchical city-first
                                                                       perspectives may be more difficult to forsake in urban regions with a history of strong core–periph-
                                                                       ery contrasts and centralisation, linking such non-hierarchical, heterogeneous views of entire urban
                                                                       territories as ‘extensive cities’ to the spatial–functional configurations and growth trajectories typical
                                                                       of many second-tier urban regions offers new ways to conceive their integration.




Downloaded by [Eastern Michigan University] at 10:09 17 October 2017
                                                                       Governing Complexity
                                                                       Comprehensive planning strategies are hard to implement in large, first-tier metropolitan areas because
                                                                       of the complexity involved. They are vast and complex entities, whose governance frameworks can
                                                                       hope to be consistent, encompassing, and effective only to a degree. They are the ‘struggling giants’,
                                                                       in the words of Kantor, Lefèvre, Saito, Savitch, and Thornley (2012), urban regions which may not only
                                                                       be partly ungovernable, but may not even need to be governed in the classical sense of the word
                                                                       (Harrison, 2013; Le Gales & Vitale, 2013). In other words, the increase in complexity changes the attain-
                                                                       able scope of governance, from a rational, encompassing framework envisioning overall metropolitan
                                                                       development, to a pragmatic focus on avoiding governance failures with long-term negative effects
                                                                       in areas such as housing, education, health or crime (Le Gales & Vitale, 2013).
                                                                           The implication of this minimalist approach is that it also forsakes the purposeful construction over
                                                                       time of strong shared identities and persuasive visions and narratives of the future, which are essential
                                                                       to turn metropolitan regions into symbolically meaningful places for citizens, firms and institutions
                                                                       (Hajer et al., 2010; Healey, 2009). Despite their many differences, second-tier metropolitan regions tend
                                                                       to have overall lower levels of complexity than their larger counterparts. If this is the case, can their
                                                                       governing bodies still deliver such proactive visions, and therefore contribute to shaping culturally
                                                                       integrated spaces whose citizens share a feeling of belonging?
                                                                           As Hodos (2011) writes about second-tier cities in general, they are smaller; their transport infra-
                                                                       structure and public services may be easier to manage; their economic and functional scope is usually
                                                                       less encompassing and complex; the pressure of globalising forces over local governance trajectories
                                                                       is weaker; and their urban migration streams tend to be smaller and more specialised. This ‘simpler
                                                                       world’ may still provide opportunities for planning strategies able to shape the symbolic and place
                                                                       qualities of metropolitan regions. These include ensuring access and proximity of citizens to local
                                                                       government (Healey, 2009), making the plethora of networks, associations and partnerships operating
                                                                       at the metropolitan scale visible, accessible and interrelatable (Nelles, 2013), promoting daily mobility
                                                                       transversally across the metropolitan region, to facilitate the expansion of the citizens’ place attach-
                                                                       ments to that scale (Kübler, 2016), or developing a toolkit of stories, metaphors and images carrying
                                                                       the ‘metropolitan idea’, which the majority of the population can understand and engage with (Hajer
                                                                       et al., 2010). It is important to assess the threshold of complexity under which this approach is viable
                                                                       against the features of different second-tier metropolitan regions in Europe.
                                                                                                                                                PLANNING THEORY & PRACTICE﻿      15



                                                                       Managing Core-Periphery Relations
                                                                       Literature in recent years has pointed out the importance of rebalancing relations between core and
                                                                       periphery to allow a productive ethos of cooperation in metropolitan regions. Actors tend to collaborate
                                                                       when they perceive symmetrical mutual relations and anticipate joint gains. Feiock (2007) writes that
                                                                       socio-economic and demographic homogeneity between municipalities in urban regions is positively
                                                                       associated with the likelihood of collaboration: interests are more likely to be shared and no city is in a
                                                                       position to ‘call the shots’ or exit the negotiation. Conversely, highly dominant core cities, such as large,
                                                                       powerful capitals, may restrict the willingness of neighbouring actors to collaborate if they introduce
                                                                       asymmetrical power relations (Rayle & Zegras, 2013) and create the perception that the gains of one
                                                                       city happen at the cost of the neglect of others.
                                                                           Clearly, inter-municipal cooperation regarding land use, transport or environmental questions can
                                                                       happen in such sites of deep-rooted political contrasts as Savini (2012) writes about Paris. But such




Downloaded by [Eastern Michigan University] at 10:09 17 October 2017
                                                                       arrangements often reflect the strategic interest of smaller centres to be symbolically associated with
                                                                       the large core city, or even to build a stronger network of peripheral centres bypassing the core,
                                                                       thereby hampering the possibilities of deeper metropolitan integration. Therefore, capital cities can
                                                                       offer obstacles to integration. In many cases, municipalities close to large capitals become more aware
                                                                       of the negative effects of the core city economic and political dominance than of the potential ben-
                                                                       efits of their location. This was the rationale behind the Edge Cities Network (Phelps, Parsons, Ballas,
                                                                       & Dowling, 2006); small European cities united by a common need to respond to the proximity of a
                                                                       large capital. A common perception is that capitals are able to use their political influence as they like,
                                                                       as ‘gateways’ to higher power levels (Savini, Majoor, & Salet, 2015), but this advantage is likely to be
                                                                       restricted to the core city itself, given the highly asymmetrical relations between partners and the low
                                                                       sense of interdependence (Cardoso, 2016).
                                                                           Can second-tier metropolitan regions mitigate some of these problems? In fact, the functional and
                                                                       demographic specificities discussed earlier, in contrast to capitals, may reduce potentially asymmetric
                                                                       power relations and the perceived political-cultural gaps between different parts of the region, inspiring
                                                                       a greater willingness to collaborate among agencies and institutions which adds to the existing need
                                                                       to collaborate. However, they might face the opposite problem, namely the lack of a leading city able
                                                                       to mobilise sufficient technical and financial resources to support metropolitan strategies, mediate
                                                                       between conflicting actors, and provide a strong, shared identity to the metropolitan region (Cardoso,
                                                                       2016; Lambregts, 2006; Lefèvre, 1998).
                                                                           This implies a thin balance between being ‘leading’ and being ‘dominant’, which metropolitan inte-
                                                                       gration strategies must address. Lefèvre writes about the failure of “technocratic projects dominated
                                                                       by the central cities” (1998, p. 21): the most successful projects noted in his early survey of metropolitan
                                                                       governance were indeed led by the added capacities of the core cities, but only when they were ready
                                                                       to make concessions, accepting roles in the network below their economic and demographic weight
                                                                       and limiting their decision power to facilitate metropolitan policymaking. Lefèvre’s early examples
                                                                       included second-tier cities such as Bologna or Stuttgart, but metropolitan strategic planning bodies
                                                                       following similar lines are active today in places like Lyon, Turin or Hanover.
                                                                           Such practices reflect the previously discussed non-hierarchical perspective on metropolitan terri-
                                                                       tories, also supported by the transformation of peripheral municipalities from ‘rural backwaters’ into
                                                                       strong political and economic actors. Nicholls (2006) documents the case of the second-tier city of
                                                                       Toulouse, explaining that this process is partly due to the decreasing role of state-led public policies
                                                                       (typically hierarchical) and the rise of spatially fragmented market forces shaping the functional and
                                                                       economic structure of metropolitan areas. As the aforementioned case of the creation of Grand Paris
                                                                       16     ﻿R. V. CARDOSO AND E. J. MEIJERS


                                                                       illustrates, the state may take longer to withdraw from capital cities as their paths of development so
                                                                       closely stand for that of the nation. In this sense Hodos (2011) may be correct in his insights about the
                                                                       loosening of the national grip and the new freedom of agency by ‘the lesser cities’.


                                                                       Conclusions
                                                                       While academics “have won the intellectual battle and demonstrated that city regions matter”
                                                                       (Parkinson, 2016, p. 629), further research can determine in what conditions and in what type of regions
                                                                       integration matters more. This paper explores whether the areas where metropolitan integration can
                                                                       generally benefit cities corresponds to typical areas of disadvantage of many second-tier cities, and
                                                                       asks if this might give those cities additional incentives for integration. We identified these disadvan-
                                                                       tages and organised them into two categories, while stressing that their presence and the urgency




Downloaded by [Eastern Michigan University] at 10:09 17 October 2017
                                                                       to overcome them varies among European cities. We then explored the potential benefits available
                                                                       to integrated second-tier metropolitan regions. In terms of potentiating agglomeration advantages
                                                                       through an increased demographic and functional mass, we found greater relative gains in second-tier
                                                                       cities than in first-tier cities. Regarding the benefits of acting as a large and coordinated entity, to share
                                                                       metropolitan resources efficiently and enhance political influence, we distilled a set of conditions
                                                                       shaped by European urban history and current policy trends and drew from relevant examples to
                                                                       suggest that many second-tier cities could benefit from that strategy.
                                                                           There are clearly boundaries to this argument: the detected potential has as many forms of reali-
                                                                       sation as the different historical, political and socio-economic contexts in European cities. We cannot
                                                                       claim any universality in the isolated argument that integration will benefit second-tier metropolitan
                                                                       regions. But we do claim that the possibilities offered by integration must be carefully explored and
                                                                       adapted to local contexts by policymakers and planners, particularly in those regions, and we indicate
                                                                       the aspects they need to consider. Therefore, this discussion must include the planning and govern-
                                                                       ance strategies that manage the obstacles and opportunities for integration in metropolitan regions.
                                                                       There are three scholarly debates to which our arguments can be linked: how planning can address
                                                                       the heterogeneity of whole urban territories to better deploy their aggregated functional resources;
                                                                       the limitations to the scope of governance set by metropolitan complexity, namely the capacity to
                                                                       shape a shared cultural and symbolic imagination; and the importance of rebalancing core–periphery
                                                                       relations to benefit metropolitan cooperation. We discussed relevant specificities and promising paths
                                                                       for second-tier metropolitan strategies from all these perspectives, and identified some of the hurdles
                                                                       they might face.
                                                                           In conclusion, and alongside the recent engagement in second-tier cities in Europe, the concept of
                                                                       the ‘second-tier metropolitan region’ can be recognised as useful for policy and research. This argument
                                                                       particularly applies to second-tier cities in countries with a dominant capital and a centralised urban
                                                                       system, as those are the cities likely to have greater disadvantages in the areas discussed here. It also
                                                                       speaks to second-tiers embedded in larger and dense urbanised areas, as they are prone to have an
                                                                       interest in capturing the demographic, economic and functional mass of their surroundings.
                                                                           However, the European urban system is supported by widely diverse national institutional frame-
                                                                       works, with great contrasts in terms of political power, financial and institutional resources, fiscal auton-
                                                                       omy and democratic legitimacy. Some metropolitan regions, for instance in France and Germany, are
                                                                       able to command vast amounts of resources, lobby their interests at higher instances, plan for the larger
                                                                       scale, and offer their citizens and firms concrete applications of the gains they can extract from integra-
                                                                       tion. Other metropolitan regions have little political power, insufficient resources and autonomy, and
                                                                                                                                                       PLANNING THEORY & PRACTICE﻿         17


                                                                       are unable to exercise overall decision-making in their territory (European Commission & UN Habitat,
                                                                       2016, p. 206). This contrasting state of affairs results in second-tier metropolitan regions being unable
                                                                       to develop comparable abilities in the pursuit of integration and the shaping of a meaningful dialogue
                                                                       amongst their agencies and institutions, with only some of them taken as relevant policy actors.
                                                                          The attention to the specificity of second-tier cities is recent, and their state of metropolitan integra-
                                                                       tion is differently advanced in European countries. An ongoing engagement with second-tier metro-
                                                                       politan regions will be necessary – through detailed case study research and wide-ranging comparative
                                                                       work – to assess how the policy relevance of the concept develops in time and how well the apparent
                                                                       potentials of integration confront the social, economic and environmental challenges of European cities.

                                                                       Notes
                                                                          1. 
                                                                             PUSH, Potential Strategic Urban Horizon: area that can be reached within 45 minutes by car. PIA, Potential
                                                                             Integration Area: areas constructed by merging Functional Urban Areas (FUAs) in which the PUSH areas




Downloaded by [Eastern Michigan University] at 10:09 17 October 2017
                                                                             that can be reached within 45 minutes overlap by at least 33%. See ESPON 1.1.1 (2005) for details.
                                                                          2. 
                                                                             The core MUA was used instead of the municipal boundaries of the core city to avoid the probable bias
                                                                             caused by administratively under- or over-bounded agglomerations.


                                                                       Disclosure Statement
                                                                       No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.


                                                                       Funding
                                                                       The authors acknowledge the financial support of a VIDI grant (Grant No. 452–14-004) offered by the Netherlands
                                                                       Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO).
                                                                       Rodrigo Cardoso acknowledges the financial support of the Fundacao para a Ciencia e a Tecnologia (Grant No.
                                                                       SFRH/BD/80157/2011) for the original research (2012–2015) on the topic of second-tier cities.


                                                                       Notes on Contributors

                                                                       Rodrigo V. Cardoso has been a post-doctoral researcher at the Faculty of Architecture and the Built Environment
                                                                       at Delft University of Technology since 2016. He completed his PhD at the Bartlett School of Planning, UCL, with
                                                                       a thesis on metropolisation processes in European second-tier urban regions. He has been expanding that line
                                                                       of research to explore the spatial, institutional and symbolic features of metropolisation processes and how they
                                                                       develop over time. Rodrigo has published in various peer-reviewed journals about metropolitan regions, sec-
                                                                       ond-tier cities and other related topics.

                                                                       Evert J. Meijers is an associate professor in the Faculty of Architecture and the Built Environment at Delft University
                                                                       of Technology, where he leads the ‘Urban Systems and Dynamics’ research group. The focus is on how relationships
                                                                       and flows between cities develop, and how these affect the fates and fortunes of cities. Furthermore, he explores
                                                                       the link between the way we spatially organise our cities and territory and their performance in terms of eco-
                                                                       nomic competitiveness, environmental sustainability and social well-being, combining insights from economic
                                                                       and urban geography, urban planning, environmental studies, regional science, cultural geography and policy
                                                                       sciences. Findings are translated into development strategies with a focus on promoting more competitive and
                                                                       attractive urban regions.

                                                                       References
                                                                       Albrechts, L., Healey, P., & Kunzmann, K. (2003). Strategic spatial planning and regional governance in Europe.
                                                                         Journal of the American Planning Association, 69, 113–129. doi:10.1080/01944360308976301
                                                                       18      ﻿R. V. CARDOSO AND E. J. MEIJERS


                                                                       Amin, A., Massey, D., & Thrift, N. (2003). Decentering the nation: A radical approach to regional inequality. London:
                                                                          Catalyst.
                                                                       Balducci, A., Fedeli, V., & Pasqui, G. (2011). Strategic planning for contemporary urban regions. City of cities: A project
                                                                          for Milan. Farnham: Ashgate.
                                                                       Batten, D. (1995). Network cities: Creative urban agglomerations for the 21st century. Urban Studies, 32, 313–327.
                                                                          doi:10.1080/00420989550013103
                                                                       BBSR. (2011). Metropolitan areas in Europe. BBSR-online-publikation 01/2011. Bonn: Bundesinstitut für Bau-, Stadt-
                                                                          und Raumforschung.
                                                                       Bourdeau-Lepage, L. (2013). Introduction. Grand Paris: Projet pour une métropole globale [Introduction. Grand Paris:
                                                                          project for a global metropolis]. Revue d’Économie Régionale & Urbaine, 3, 403–436. doi:10.3917/reru.133.0403
                                                                       Burger, M. J., & Meijers, E. (2016). Agglomerations and the rise of urban network externalities. Papers in Regional
                                                                          Science, 95, 5–15. doi:10.1111/pirs.12223
                                                                       Burger, M. J., Meijers, E., Hoogerbrugge, M., & Treserra, J. (2015). Borrowed size, agglomeration shadows and cultural
                                                                          amenities in north-west Europe. European Planning Studies, 23, 1090–1109. doi:10.1080/09654313.2014.905002




Downloaded by [Eastern Michigan University] at 10:09 17 October 2017
                                                                       Camagni, R., Capello, R., & Caragliu, A. (2015). The rise of second-rank cities: What role for agglomeration economies?
                                                                          European Planning Studies, 23, 1069–1089. doi:10.1080/09654313.2014.904999
                                                                       Camagni, R., Capello, R., & Caragliu, A. (2016). Static vs. Dynamic agglomeration economies. Spatial context and
                                                                          structural evolution behind urban growth. Papers in Regional Science, 95, 133–158. doi:10.1111/pirs.12182
                                                                       Cardoso, R. (2016). Overcoming barriers to institutional integration in European second-tier urban regions. European
                                                                          Planning Studies, 24, 2197–2216. doi:10.1080/09654313.2016.1251883
                                                                       Cardoso, R., & Meijers, E. (2016). Contrasts between first-tier and second-tier cities in Europe: A functional
                                                                          perspective. European Planning Studies, 24, 996–1015. doi:10.1080/09654313.2015.1120708
                                                                       Champion, A. G. (2001). A changing demographic regime and evolving polycentric urban regions:
                                                                          Consequences for the size, composition and distribution of city populations. Urban Studies, 38, 657–677.
                                                                          doi:10.1080/00420980120035277
                                                                       Chen, Y., & Rosenthal, S. (2008). Local amenities and life-cycle migration: Do people move for jobs or fun? Journal
                                                                          of Urban Economics, 64, 519–537. doi:10.1016/j.jue.2008.05.005
                                                                       Combes, P., & Gobillon, L. (2015). The empirics of agglomeration economies. In G. Duranton, J. V. Henderson, & W.
                                                                          Strange (Eds.), Handbook of regional and urban economics (Vol. 5A, pp. 247–348). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
                                                                       Crouch, C., & Le Galès, P. (2012). Cities as national champions? Journal of European Public Policy, 19, 405–419. doi:
                                                                          10.1080/13501763.2011.640795
                                                                       Dijkstra, L. (2013). Why investing more in the capital can lead to less growth. Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy
                                                                          and Society, 6, 251–268. doi:10.1093/cjres/rst009
                                                                       Dijkstra, L., Garcilazo, E., & McCann, P. (2013). The economic performance of European cities and city regions: Myths
                                                                          and realities. European Planning Studies, 21, 334–354. doi:10.1080/09654313.2012.716245
                                                                       Duranton, G., & Puga, D. (2004). Micro-foundations of urban agglomeration economies. In J. V. Henderson & J-F.
                                                                          Thisse (Eds.), Handbook of regional and urban economics (Vol. 4, pp. 2063–2117). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
                                                                       ESPON. (2005). 1.1.1. Potentials for polycentric development in Europe. Project report – revised version. Stockholm:
                                                                          ESPON and Nordregio.
                                                                       ESPON. (2007). 1.4.3. Study on urban functions. Final report. Brussels: ESPON and IGEAT.
                                                                       ESPON. (2016). European second tier cities in cohesive territorial development. Presented at ESPON workshop, Berlin.
                                                                       ESPON/CAEE. (2010). The case for agglomerations economies in Europe. Final Report. Manchester: ESPON and
                                                                          University of Manchester.
                                                                       ESPON/SGPTD. (2012). Second tier cities in territorial development in Europe: Performance, policies and prospects.
                                                                          Final report. Liverpool: ESPON and European Institute of Urban Affairs.
                                                                       European Commission & UN Habitat. (2016). The state of European cities 2016. Cities leading the way to a better future.
                                                                          Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union.
                                                                       European Communities. (2008). Green paper on territorial cohesion, the way ahead. Inforegio 28. Luxembourg: Office
                                                                          of the Official Publications of the European Communities.
                                                                       Faludi, A. (2015). The ‘Blue Banana’ revisited. European Journal of Spatial Development Refereed Article, 56, 1–26.
                                                                          Retrieved from https://www.nordregio.se/Global/Publications/Publications%202017/Refereed_56_Faludi(2015).
                                                                          pdf
                                                                       Faludi, A. (2016). The poverty of territorialism: Revisiting European spatial planning. disP – The Planning Review,
                                                                          52, 73–81. doi:10.1080/02513625.2016.1235886
                                                                                                                                                          PLANNING THEORY & PRACTICE﻿           19


                                                                       Feiock, R. (2007). Rational choice and regional governance. Journal of Urban Affairs, 29, 47–63. doi:10.1111/j.1467-
                                                                          9906.2007.00322.x
                                                                       Friedmann, J., & Miller, J. (1965). The urban field. Journal of the American Institute of Planners, 31, 312–320.
                                                                          doi:10.1080/01944366508978185
                                                                       Glaeser, E. L., & Gottlieb, J. D. (2006). Urban resurgence and the consumer city. Urban Studies, 43, 1275–1299.
                                                                          doi:10.1080/00420980600775683
                                                                       Glaeser, E. L., Kolko, J., & Saiz, A. (2001). Consumer city. Journal of Economic Geography, 1, 27–50.
                                                                       Grant Thornton. (2015). The rise of the second city. Retrieved from https://www.gtlongread.uk/
                                                                       Hajer, M., van’t Klooster, S., & Grijzen, J. (Eds.) (2010). Strong stories – How the Dutch are reinventing spatial planning.
                                                                          Rotterdam: 010.
                                                                       Harding, A., Harloe, M., & Rees, J. (2010). Manchester’s bust regime? International Journal of Urban and Regional
                                                                          Research, 34, 981–991. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2427.2010.01013.x
                                                                       Harrison, J. (2013). Struggling giants: City-region governance in London, New York, Paris, and Tokyo [book review].
                                                                          Journal of Regional Science, 53, 541–542. doi:10.1111/jors.12038




Downloaded by [Eastern Michigan University] at 10:09 17 October 2017
                                                                       Harrison, B. (2015, March 19). How Bristol can claw its way back on the devolution agenda. [blog]. Centre for Cities.
                                                                          Retrieved from https://www.centreforcities.org/blog/how-bristol-can-claw-its-way-back-on-the-devolution-
                                                                          agenda/
                                                                       Healey, P. (2009). City regions and place development. Regional Studies, 43, 831–843. doi:10.1080/00343400701861336
                                                                       Hodos, J. (2011). Second cities: Globalisation and local politics in Manchester and Philadelphia. Philadelphia, PA:
                                                                          Temple University Press.
                                                                       Hohenberg, P. M. (2004). The historical geography of European cities: An interpretative essay. In J. V. Henderson &
                                                                          J-F. Thisse (Eds.) Handbook of regional and urban economics 4 (pp. 3021–3052). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
                                                                       Hulst, R., & Van Montfort, A. (2007). Inter-municipal cooperation in Europe. Dordrecht: Springer.
                                                                       Kantor, P., Lefèvre, C., Saito, A., Savitch, H. V., & Thornley, A. (2012). Struggling giants: City-Region governance in
                                                                          London, New York, Paris, and Tokyo. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
                                                                       Kresl, P. K., & Ietri, D. (2016). Smaller cities in a world of competitiveness. Abingdon: Routledge.
                                                                       Kübler, D. (2016). Citizenship in the fragmented metropolis: An individual-level analysis from Switzerland. Journal
                                                                          of Urban Affairs. Advance online publication. doi:10.1111/juaf.12276
                                                                       Kunzmann, K. R., & Wegener, M. (1991). The pattern of urbanisation in Western Europe. Ekistics, 58, 282–291.
                                                                          Retrieved from http://www.spiekermann-wegener.com/pub/pdf/Pattern_of_Urbanisation.pdf
                                                                       Le Gales, P., & Vitale, T. (2013). Governing the large metropolis: A research agenda. Working Paper, cahiers de
                                                                          recherche du Programme Cities are Back in Town 2013-8. Retrieved from https://spire.sciencespo.fr/
                                                                          hdl:/2441/8kbfvpahkhqtss09oa0j65136
                                                                       Lefèvre, C. (1998). Metropolitan government and governance in western countries: A critical review. International
                                                                          Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 22, 9–25. doi:10.1111/1468-2427.00120
                                                                       Martin, R., Pike, A., Tyler, P., & Gardiner, B. (2015). Spatially rebalancing the UK economy: The need for a new policy
                                                                          model. (Report). London: Regional Studies Association, UK.
                                                                       Meijers, E. (2008). Summing small cities does not make a large city: Polycentric urban regions and the provision of
                                                                          cultural, leisure and sports amenities. Urban Studies, 45, 2323–2342. doi:10.1177/0042098008095870
                                                                       Meijers, E., Hoogerbrugge, M., & Cardoso, R. (in press). Beyond polycentricity: Does stronger integration between
                                                                          cities in polycentric urban regions improve performance? Tijdschrift voor Economische en Sociale Geografie.
                                                                       Meijers, E., & Romein, A. (2003). Realizing potential: Building regional organizing capacity in polycentric urban
                                                                          regions. European Urban and Regional Studies, 10, 173–186. doi:10.1177/0969776403010002005
                                                                       Melo, P., Graham, D., & Noland, R. (2009). A meta-analysis of estimates of urban agglomeration economies. Regional
                                                                          Science and Urban Economics, 39, 332–342. doi:10.1016/j.regsciurbeco.2008.12.002
                                                                       METREX. (2014). Metropolitan dimension: Position statement (Report). Glasgow: The Network of European
                                                                          Metropolitan Regions and Areas.
                                                                       Mogridge, M., & Parr, J. (1997). Metropolis or region: On the development and structure of London. Regional Studies,
                                                                          31, 97–115. doi:10.1080/00343409750133233
                                                                       National Geographic Traveller. (2014). Cover story: Europe’s second cities. Retrieved from https://www.
                                                                          natgeotraveller.co.uk/destinations/europe/cover-story-europes-second-cities/
                                                                       Nelles, J. (2013). Cooperation and capacity? Exploring the sources and limits of city-region governance partnerships.
                                                                          International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 37, 1349–1367. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2427.2012.01112.x
                                                                       20      ﻿R. V. CARDOSO AND E. J. MEIJERS


                                                                       Nicholls, W. J. (2006). Power to the periphery: Suburban empowerment in Toulouse, France. Environment and
                                                                          Planning A, 38, 1715–1737. doi:10.1068/a3813
                                                                       OECD. (2012). Promoting growth in all regions: Lessons from across the OECD. Paris: OECD.
                                                                       Parkinson, M. (2016). UK city regions: Policies, performance and prospects. Town Planning Review, 87, 629–653.
                                                                          doi:10.3828/tpr.2016.42a
                                                                       Parkinson, M., Meegan, R., & Karecha, J. (2015). City size and economic performance: Is bigger better, small more
                                                                          beautiful or middling marvelous? European Planning Studies, 23, 1054–1068. doi:10.1080/09654313.2014.904998
                                                                       Phelps, N., Fallon, R., & Williams, C. (2001). Small firms, borrowed size and the urban-rural shift. Regional Studies,
                                                                          35, 613–624. doi:10.1080/00343400120075885
                                                                       Phelps, N., Parsons, N., Ballas, D., & Dowling, A. (2006). Post-suburban Europe: Planning and politics at the margins
                                                                          of Europe’s capital cities. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
                                                                       Rayle, L., & Zegras, C. (2013). The emergence of inter-municipal collaboration: Evidence from metropolitan planning
                                                                          in Portugal. European Planning Studies, 21, 867–889. doi:10.1080/09654313.2012.722932
                                                                       Salet, W., Vermeulen, R., Savini, F., & Dembski, S. (2015). Interface. Planning for the new European metropolis:




Downloaded by [Eastern Michigan University] at 10:09 17 October 2017
                                                                          Functions, politics and symbols. Planning Theory & Practice, 16, 251–275. doi:10.1080/14649357.2015.1021574
                                                                       Savini, F. (2012). Who makes the (new) metropolis? Cross-border coalition and urban development in Paris.
                                                                          Environment and Planning A, 44, 1875–1895. doi:10.1068/a44632
                                                                       Savini, F. (2013). Political dilemmas in peripheral development: Investment, regulation, and interventions in
                                                                          metropolitan Amsterdam. Planning Theory & Practice, 14, 333–348. doi:10.1080/14649357.2013.820340
                                                                       Savini, F., Majoor, S., & Salet, W. (2015). Urban peripheries: Reflecting on politics and projects in Amsterdam, Milan,
                                                                          and Paris. Environment and Planning C, 33, 457–474. doi:10.1068/c13132
                                                                       Thierstein, A. (2015). Interface. Metropolitan regions: Functional relations between the core and periphery. Planning
                                                                          Theory & Practice, 16, 254–258. doi:10.1080/14649357.2015.1021574
                                                                       Van Oort, F., Burger, M. J., & Raspe, O. (2010). On the economic foundation of the urban network paradigm. Spatial
                                                                          integration, functional integration and urban complementarities within the Dutch Randstad. Urban Studies, 47,
                                                                          725–748. doi:10.1177/0042098009352362
                                                                       West of England Local Enterprise Partnership. (2014). We are a partnership for growth. Retrieved from https://
                                                                          www.westofenglandlep.co.uk/
