[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: journal/B11-camagni-capello-caragliu-2015-the-rise-of-second-rank-cities-what-role-for-agglomeration-economies-10.1080-09654313.2014.904999.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Title:           The Rise of Second-Rank Cities: What Role for Agglomeration Economies?
Subject:         European Planning Studies, 2014. doi:10.1080/09654313.2014.904999
Keywords:        
Author:          ROBERTO CAMAGNI
Creator:         Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.520/W
Producer:        iText 4.2.0 by 1T3XT
CreationDate:    Fri Apr 11 16:28:17 2014 WIB
ModDate:         Fri Apr  3 13:07:43 2015 WIB
Custom Metadata: no
Metadata Stream: yes
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            AcroForm
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           23
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       493.228 x 702.992 pts
Page rot:        0
File size:       442239 bytes
Optimized:       no
PDF version:     1.4
[Extracted Text]
This article was downloaded by: [Umeå University Library]
On: 02 April 2015, At: 23:07
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK



                                European Planning Studies
                                Publication details, including instructions for authors and
                                subscription information:
                                http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ceps20

                                The Rise of Second-Rank Cities: What
                                Role for Agglomeration Economies?
                                                 a                  a                   a
                                Roberto Camagni , Roberta Capello & Andrea Caragliu
                                a
                                 ABC Department, Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
                                Published online: 04 Jun 2014.




Click for updates


To cite this article: Roberto Camagni, Roberta Capello & Andrea Caragliu (2014): The Rise of
Second-Rank Cities: What Role for Agglomeration Economies?, European Planning Studies, DOI:
10.1080/09654313.2014.904999

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09654313.2014.904999



PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
“Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
                                                                 Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
                                                                 and-conditions




Downloaded by [Umeå University Library] at 23:07 02 April 2015
                                                                 European Planning Studies, 2014
                                                                 http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09654313.2014.904999




                                                                 The Rise of Second-Rank Cities: What
                                                                 Role for Agglomeration Economies?

                                                                 ROBERTO CAMAGNI, ROBERTA CAPELLO & ANDREA CARAGLIU
                                                                 ABC Department, Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy




Downloaded by [Umeå University Library] at 23:07 02 April 2015
                                                                 (Received June 2013; accepted January 2014)



                                                                 ABSTRACT In the last 15 years, empirical evidence has emerged about the fact that European first-
                                                                 rank cities have not always led national economic performance, and when they did, the difference
                                                                 between first- and second-rank cities in explaining national growth has not been significant. A
                                                                 recent work [Dijkstra, L., Garcilazo, E. & McCann, P. (2013) The economic performance of
                                                                 European cities and city regions: Myths and realities, European Planning Studies, 21(3),
                                                                 pp. 334 –354] claims that second-rank cities have in fact outperformed first-rank cities, becoming
                                                                 the main driving forces in national economic performance. In the debate that emphasizes the role
                                                                 of second-rank cities in national growth, a simplified view of the role of agglomeration economies
                                                                 is provided; they are taken for granted in small- and medium-sized cities and only in large cities
                                                                 will the problem of a downturn in urban returns to scale emerge. In this paper, a more complex
                                                                 view is assumed, claiming that the oversimplified interpretation that urban economic performance
                                                                 simply depends on the exploitation of agglomeration economies and that these agglomeration
                                                                 economies merely depend on urban size alone should be abandoned. Some already existing
                                                                 theoretical frameworks in urban economics can help in recalling the role of possible bifurcations
                                                                 in the development path of cities, linked to the capability to attract or develop new and higher-
                                                                 order functions, increase internal efficiency and reach scale economies through cooperation
                                                                 networks with other cities (the city-network theory). All these elements work as conditions for
                                                                 fully exploiting agglomeration economies and ways to overcome urban decreasing returns.


                                                                 1. Introduction
                                                                 The interest in the role of cities in explaining national economic performance is not at all
                                                                 new and has always been at the basis of urban economics theory and economic geography
                                                                 studies. In the 1990s, thanks to seminal contributions (Glaeser et al., 1992; Krugman,
                                                                 1991), a resurgence of interest in cities and in their role in national economic performance
                                                                 was registered, followed by more recent studies, especially on the North American reality
                                                                 (Glaeser, 2008; Henderson, 1974, 1985, 1996; Rosenthal & Strange, 2004; Sassen, 2002;
                                                                 Scott, 2001).

                                                                 Correspondence Address: Andrea Caragliu, ABC Department, Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci,
                                                                 32 Building 5, 20133 Milan (MI), Italy. Email: andrea.caragliu@polimi.it


                                                                 # 2014 Taylor & Francis
                                                                 2   R. Camagni, R. Capello and A. Caragliu

                                                                    This revival of interest in the role of cities in explaining national economic performance
                                                                 is not merely driven by an academic fashion (Henderson, 2010), but finds concrete evi-
                                                                 dence of real changes in the role of large cities in driving national economies (Nijkamp
                                                                 & Kourtit, 2011, 2012). For a long time, in the last 20 years of the last century, large Euro-
                                                                 pean cities (but not only European) benefitted from two main favourable exogenous
                                                                 factors that enhanced their generalized performance: the emergence and consolidation
                                                                 of the ICT paradigm, that was quickly utilized to re-launch urban activities after the pre-
                                                                 vious de-industrialization period, and the birth of the European Single Market project by
                                                                 president Jacques Delors in 1985, which generated an enormous inflow of FDI into large
                                                                 gateway cities in all European countries (Camagni, 2001). On the other hand, the econ-
                                                                 omic crisis of more recent years mostly hit large and capital cities, natural loci of core
                                                                 economic and financial activities. This implies that second-rank cities have proved to
                                                                 be the most resilient areas to economic downturn in advanced economies.




Downloaded by [Umeå University Library] at 23:07 02 April 2015
                                                                    The evidence of a scarcity of public resources sharpened the debate on the contribution
                                                                 that each territory can provide to national competitiveness, encouraging a comparison
                                                                 between the efficiency displayed by capital cities vs. second-rank cities in exploiting
                                                                 public investment for growth. It is in fact well known that large cities are expensive
                                                                 machines, requiring large social overhead capital investments and exhibiting expensive
                                                                 real estate markets and high-rise, capital-intensive buildings. Second-rank cities, once
                                                                 endowed with some necessary preconditions for a modern development—namely inter-
                                                                 national links, high-education and cultural facilities—may well exhibit higher public
                                                                 resources efficiency and better quality of life conditions than first-rank cities, being in a con-
                                                                 dition to find appropriate specialization niches inside the international division of labour.
                                                                    The vast academic and policy debate over the last years has generated some important
                                                                 empirical studies comparing the role of second- vs. first-rank cities in explaining national
                                                                 economic competitiveness (Glaeser, 2011). While much US literature celebrated the role
                                                                 of large metro areas in fostering economic growth, there is common evidence that in
                                                                 Europe, over the last two decades, second-rank cities have often outperformed first-rank
                                                                 cities, or, even when first-rank cities grew faster, the difference with respect to second-
                                                                 rank cities has been negligible. In fact, in several countries, second-rank cities have
                                                                 been identified as the main driving forces in national economic performance (Dijkstra
                                                                 et al., 2013; Parkinson et al., 2014).
                                                                    In this literature, there is a simplified view of the role of agglomeration economies; they
                                                                 are taken for granted in small and medium-size cities and only in large cities will the
                                                                 problem of a downturn in urban returns to scale eventually emerge.
                                                                    Here, a more complex view is assumed. In fact, this paper adds to the existing literature
                                                                 the idea that urban economic performance does not only depend on the exploitation of
                                                                 agglomeration economies and that, in turn, agglomeration economies do not only
                                                                 depend on urban size alone. Some existing theoretical frameworks in urban economics
                                                                 can help recall the role of possible bifurcations in the development path of cities, linked
                                                                 to the capability to attract or develop new and higher-order functions (the SOUDY
                                                                 model, Camagni et al., 1986), increase internal efficiency and reach scale economies
                                                                 though cooperation networks with other cities (the city-network theory, Camagni, 1993;
                                                                 Conti & Dematteis, 1995). All these elements work as conditions for fully exploiting
                                                                 agglomeration economies and ways to overcome urban decreasing returns.1
                                                                    This paper aims at inspecting the conditions leading second-rank cities in the EU in
                                                                 some periods to outperform with respect to larger metro areas. Urban rank is defined
                                                                                                                                Rise of Second-Rank Cities      3

                                                                 according to the cities’ physical (population) size; in particular, first-rank cities are defined
                                                                 as those cities (LUZ areas) with a population larger than 1 million inhabitants. Second rank
                                                                 cities are instead identified as those LUZ areas with a number of inhabitants in a range
                                                                 from 1 million to 200,000 inhabitants. In both cases, data used to define the classes
                                                                 refer to 2011.2
                                                                    The interpretation assumed in this work is that cities may experience a halt in their
                                                                 growth path and even a decline irrespective of their size class, in the absence of these con-
                                                                 ditional factors. These factors are not really quantitative in nature, but rather qualitative
                                                                 and some quantum jumps in their endowment are needed at specific intervals if agglom-
                                                                 eration economies have to fully generate their beneficial effects. The quality of activities
                                                                 hosted, the quality of production factors, the density of external linkages and cooperation
                                                                 networks, the quality of urban infrastructure—in internal and external mobility, in edu-
                                                                 cation, in public services—are all enabling factors allowing a long-term ‘structural




Downloaded by [Umeå University Library] at 23:07 02 April 2015
                                                                 dynamics’ process (in the language of dynamic modelling) through what could easily
                                                                 be called a process of urban innovation in each urban category.
                                                                    The paper thus departs from most existing literature, by decomposing the black box of
                                                                 agglomeration economies, and their impacts on long-run urban performance, into their
                                                                 main determinants, as well as by better qualifying the commonplace finding that agglom-
                                                                 eration economies/diseconomies would be the only determinants of urban dynamics.
                                                                    The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 briefly presents the recent debate on the rise
                                                                 of the second-rank cities, and highlights the existing conceptual toolbox that allows over-
                                                                 coming the traditional view of the role of agglomeration economies in urban growth.
                                                                 Section 3 presents a descriptive analysis on the economic performance of the different
                                                                 size classes. Section 4 presents the conceptual model and the rich database on which
                                                                 the model is estimated. Section 5 contains the results of the econometric estimates,
                                                                 while Section 6 concludes.

                                                                 2. The Theoretical Explanations for the Rise of Second-Rank Cities: Testable
                                                                 Assumptions
                                                                 Against the much celebrated triumph of (large) cities (Glaeser, 2011), recent empirical
                                                                 evidence has been presented on the fact that in the EU the last two decades witnessed a
                                                                 relatively comparable performance across cities of first and second rank. Within this
                                                                 recent debate, agglomeration economies are called upon to explain the relatively better
                                                                 performance of second-rank cities, while diseconomies of scale are identified as the
                                                                 cause of the limited success of large ones (Dijkstra et al., 2013). The explanations pro-
                                                                 vided for such a phenomenon are not convincing, and risk an ex-post circular reasoning:
                                                                 a structural break—namely the limit between economies and diseconomies—is used to
                                                                 explain cyclical economic phenomena, with no interpretation of why it takes place
                                                                 exactly at a specific moment and in a particular place.
                                                                    In the above reasoning, two problems are mixed together: a structural one and a cyclical
                                                                 one. The former deals with the existence of a theoretical explanation concerning the way
                                                                 and conditions for the different city-size classes to exploit increasing returns to urban scale
                                                                 (the how problem); the latter problem concerns the question whether different classes of
                                                                 urban size are better suited for expansion or crisis periods (the when). The how issue is
                                                                 logically propaedeutical and more interesting than the when issue, as descriptive evidence
                                                                 shows that there are some large cities still able to play a role in their national economies,
                                                                 4   R. Camagni, R. Capello and A. Caragliu

                                                                 and some second-rank cities still lagging behind, demonstrating that, for the same urban
                                                                 size, agglomeration economies seem to play a positive role for some cities and not for
                                                                 others.
                                                                    Urban economists are called to give some more appropriate explanations to these
                                                                 phenomena. In our opinion, some relevant theoretical interpretations concerning increas-
                                                                 ing returns to urban scale—going beyond the use of a single, smooth function for the entire
                                                                 spectrum of city sizes, interpreting the capacity of cities to exploit agglomeration econom-
                                                                 ies—are already available in urban economic theory, and deserve empirical demon-
                                                                 stration.
                                                                    The first explanation for the capacity of a city to overcome diseconomies of scale is con-
                                                                 tained in the so-called SOUDY (Supply Oriented Urban DYnamics) model (Camagni
                                                                 et al., 1986). The model assumes that an “efficient” city-size interval exists separately
                                                                 for each hierarchical rank, associated with rank-specific economic functions. In other




Downloaded by [Umeå University Library] at 23:07 02 April 2015
                                                                 words, for each economic function characterised by a specific demand threshold and a
                                                                 minimum production size, a minimum and a maximum city size exists beyond which
                                                                 urban location diseconomies overcome production benefits typical of that function.
                                                                    As Figure 1 shows, under these conditions, for each economic function and each associ-
                                                                 ated urban rank, it is possible to define a minimum and a maximum city size in which the
                                                                 city operates under efficiency conditions (i.e. with net positive gains) (d1 – d2 for the func-
                                                                 tion—and centre—of rank 1; d3 – d4 for the function—and centre—of rank 2; . . . ). The
                                                                 higher the production benefits (profits) of the single functions (increasing with rank),
                                                                 the higher the efficient urban size interval associated to such function.
                                                                    As each centre grows, approaching the maximum size compatible with its rank (“con-
                                                                 strained dynamics”), it enters an instability area (e.g. in d3 – d2 in Figure 1) where it
                                                                 becomes a potentially suitable location for higher-order functions, thanks to the achieve-
                                                                 ment of a critical demand size for them. In dynamic terms, each city’s long-term growth
                                                                 possibilities depend on its ability to move to higher urban ranks, developing or attracting




                                                                                    Figure 1. Efficient city size for different urban functions.
                                                                                                 Source: Camagni et al. (1986).
                                                                                                                                Rise of Second-Rank Cities        5

                                                                 new and higher-order functions (“structural dynamics”). This “jump” is not mechanically
                                                                 attained: it represents a true urban innovation and is treated as a stochastic process in the
                                                                 dynamic model.
                                                                    The interest of this model resides in the fact that it overcomes some of the limits of the
                                                                 “optimal” city-size theory, by suggesting:

                                                                 . the need to replace “optimal size” by a “range” within which the city size is “efficient”,3
                                                                   i.e. where average production benefits exceed average location costs;
                                                                 . the need to allow different “efficient” urban intervals according to the functions actually
                                                                   performed by the cities;
                                                                 . the possibility of decoupling urban ranks from urban size. Differently from Christaller’s
                                                                   approach, two cities of the same size (for example, size d2 in Figure 1) can belong to two
                                                                   ranks (1 and 2 in the example), depending on their capacity to attract/develop higher




Downloaded by [Umeå University Library] at 23:07 02 April 2015
                                                                   functions.4

                                                                    The second theory helpful in explaining the determinants of agglomeration economies
                                                                 that go beyond urban size is the city-network theory. Born in the field of industrial econ-
                                                                 omics (Chesnais, 1988; Williamson, 1985), the concept of network behaviour—namely a
                                                                 cooperative organizational form, intermediate between internal and external growth of the
                                                                 firm, between “make” or “buy”—was transferred into urban economics providing a suc-
                                                                 cessful theoretical framework to overcome the limiting interpretative power of the tra-
                                                                 ditional central-place model.5 In fact, real city-systems in advanced countries have
                                                                 departed from the abstract Christaller pattern of a nested hierarchy of centres and
                                                                 markets, showing (Camagni, 1993):

                                                                 . processes of city specialization and presence of higher-order functions in centres of
                                                                   lower order;
                                                                 . horizontal linkages between similar cities, not allowed in the traditional model: e.g. the
                                                                   financial and headquarter networks among top world cities, or the art cities linked
                                                                   through tourist “itineraries” (so called “synergy networks”); the systems of specialised
                                                                   cities exploiting the advantages of the division of labour, like the Dutch Randstad or the
                                                                   network of medium-sized cities in the Veneto region (“complementarity networks”)
                                                                   (Camagni & Capello, 2004).

                                                                    In the new logic, other elements come to the fore—economies of vertical and horizontal
                                                                 integration, and network externalities similar to those emerging from “club goods”. These
                                                                 elements provide the possibility for cities to reach increasing returns and scale economies
                                                                 through network integration—in the economic, logistic and organizational fields—with
                                                                 other cities.
                                                                    In this sense, the concept of city networks recalls that of “borrowed size”, which was
                                                                 launched by Alonso (1973) to explain a disconnection between size and function of
                                                                 smaller cities that were part of a megalopolitan urban complex:

                                                                     the concept of a system of cities has many facets, but one of particular interest . . . is
                                                                     the concept of borrowed size, whereby a small city or metropolitan area exhibits
                                                                     some of the characteristics of a larger one if it is near other population concen-
                                                                     trations. (Alonso, 1973, p. 200)
                                                                 6   R. Camagni, R. Capello and A. Caragliu

                                                                 According to this literature, “borrowed size” can easily explain why second-rank cities grow
                                                                 economically without a physical expansion: their location in polycentric urban systems sub-
                                                                 stitutes for their individual physical size (Meijers & Burger, 2010), since borrowed size
                                                                 allows single cities to upgrade their economic functions without necessarily increasing
                                                                 their individual size. Externalities accrue to functionally connected urban areas, that thus
                                                                 reach economies of scale without incurring the costs associated with (excessive) urban
                                                                 size (Phelps et al., 2001; Veneri & Burgalassi, 2012; and, for a conceptual review, Parr,
                                                                 2002). Conversely, a polycentric urban structure, whereby cities of average size can over-
                                                                 come the limits associated with sheer size, may be associated with limitations to the achieve-
                                                                 ment of economies of scale whenever the threshold of given services cannot be dispersed in
                                                                 such a spatial arrangement (see for instance Burger et al., 2013, 2014).
                                                                    An important difference, however, exists between the concept of borrowed size and
                                                                 that of city networks. The concept of city networks adds to that of “borrowed size” the




Downloaded by [Umeå University Library] at 23:07 02 April 2015
                                                                 idea that size can be borrowed not only thanks to physical proximity to larger centres, but
                                                                 also thanks to relationships and flows of a mainly horizontal and non-hierarchical nature
                                                                 among complementary or similar centres, located far from each other, with the aim of
                                                                 achieving network externalities (Camagni, 1993; Camagni & Capello, 2004; Capello, 2000).
                                                                    These conceptual ideas help in explaining why cities of intermediate size are being
                                                                 increasingly looked upon as the places that could well host the growth of the years to
                                                                 come: limited city size, in fact, facilitates environmental equilibrium, efficiency of the
                                                                 mobility system and the possibility for citizens to retain a sense of identity, provided that
                                                                 a superior economic efficiency is reached through external cooperation with other cities,
                                                                 located in the same regions or distant but well connected. Urban productivity was empiri-
                                                                 cally found to be much more closely related to urban connectivity—a concept similar to
                                                                 urban network relations—than to urban scale (McCann & Acs, 2011), thus supporting
                                                                 the global city argument but also the medium-sized cities’ potentials.
                                                                    The joint application of the SOUDY model and the city-network paradigm has relevant
                                                                 implications for urban efficiency and growth: size is not the only determinants of factor pro-
                                                                 ductivity and urban performance. The presence of high-order functions and integration inside
                                                                 city networks are also extremely important elements in the explanation of the competitive
                                                                 advantage of cities, allowing the boosting of productivity even in presence of limited urban size.
                                                                    We expect functional specialization and city networks to play a prominent role in
                                                                 explaining the achievement and exploitation of agglomeration economies (or in avoiding
                                                                 agglomeration diseconomies) in second-rank cities.6 Moreover, within second-rank cities,
                                                                 we expect best performing cities to be able to exploit increasing returns much more than
                                                                 the other cities.
                                                                    Our research hypotheses are therefore the following:

                                                                 (a) small- and medium-sized cities can also experience a halt or a decline in their growth
                                                                     pattern, since each city’s long-term growth possibilities depend on its ability to move
                                                                     to higher urban ranks, developing or attracting new and higher-order functions;
                                                                 (b) the best performing small- and medium-sized cities are able to postpone and over-
                                                                     come the appearance of decreasing returns, thus being able to fully exploit increasing
                                                                     returns to urban scale;
                                                                 (c) the capability of best performing small- and medium-sized cities to exploit increasing
                                                                     returns depends on the development of higher valued functions and external
                                                                     cooperation networks;
                                                                                                                              Rise of Second-Rank Cities     7

                                                                 (d) For second-rank cities, these growth-enhancing factors can be borrowed from closely
                                                                     located large urban areas.


                                                                 3. Urban Economic Performance from 1996 to 2009: Second- vs. First-Rank Cities
                                                                 This section presents a comprehensive picture of the medium-run trends for a sample of 136
                                                                 EU metropolitan areas, dividing the trends between first-rank and second-rank cities. The
                                                                 two “uniform categories” of first- and second-rank cities are defined in terms of physical
                                                                 size, as usually done in the economic geography literature. As anticipated in Section 1,
                                                                 first-rank cities are defined as those cities (LUZ areas) with a population larger than 1
                                                                 million inhabitants. Second rank cities are instead identified as those LUZ areas with a
                                                                 number of inhabitants in a range from 1 million to 200,000 inhabitants. In both cases,




Downloaded by [Umeå University Library] at 23:07 02 April 2015
                                                                 data used to define the classes refer to 2011.
                                                                    Figure 2 presents the 1996 – 2009 time series for yearly gross domestic product (GDP)
                                                                 growth rates divided by urban rank. A first result is that a clear cyclical process character-
                                                                 ized European economies. Figure 2 displays annual GDP growth rates on the main graph,
                                                                 while showing aggregate GDP growth rates in the bottom (first through third period) and
                                                                 top-right (fourth and last period) corner of the figure.
                                                                    The main graph suggests a few relevant stylized facts for the EU economies in the sur-
                                                                 veyed period:

                                                                 .   the EU economy, following a worldwide trend, behaves cyclically. Two fast growth stages
                                                                     can be identified, running from 1995 to 2000 and from 2003 to 2007; between such




                                                                                  Figure 2. Annual GDP growth rates, 1996– 2009, by city rank.
                                                                                              Note: In the boxes: period averages.
                                                                                                 Source: authors’ elaboration.
                                                                 8   R. Camagni, R. Capello and A. Caragliu

                                                                   periods, three years of growth slowdown (2000–2003) can be identified. Finally, after
                                                                   2007 EU data clearly show the appearance of the (currently ongoing) financial crisis,
                                                                   first marking a relevant growth slowdown in 2008, then showing the first signs of GDP
                                                                   contraction in 2009. In Figure 2, these periods are marked with vertical dashed lines;
                                                                 . most interestingly, while in the fastest expansion periods rank 1 cities seem to drive
                                                                   economic growth (black-coloured bars in Figure 2), in slowdown times rank 2 cities
                                                                   (shaded colour in Figure 2) invert this trend and are at the forefront of the process of
                                                                   economic development. In Figure 2 this statement can be easily seen from the ancillary
                                                                   graphs at the bottom and top-right corner of the main chart, showing period average
                                                                   growth rates. Rank 2 cities grow in fact faster than rank 1 cities in the second period,
                                                                   and present a less pronounced decline in GDP in the fourth period;
                                                                 . while this EU-wide trend is relatively visible with plain GDP growth data, the preva-
                                                                   lence of rank 2 cities as engines of economic growth in recent periods emerges more




Downloaded by [Umeå University Library] at 23:07 02 April 2015
                                                                   clearly from the inspection of Figure 3(a) – (c). Figure 3, in fact, represents per capita
                                                                   GDP growth rates for the same four periods, showing that indeed in 8 of the last 10
                                                                   years rank 2 cities outperformed rank 1 cities, thus contributing more to the overall
                                                                   country (and EU-wide) growth of productivity. This statement is again valid for both
                                                                   the second as well as for the last period above identified;
                                                                 . while Figure 3(a) shows such trend for the whole EU27, Figures 3(b) and 3(c) break down
                                                                   this result by macro areas. Figure 3(b) shows data for productivity growth in the EU15,
                                                                   and Figure 3(c) for New Member States (henceforth, NMS). Because of the large
                                                                   portion of EU27 GDP produced by Western Countries, Figure 3(b) behaves quite simi-
                                                                   larly to the main EU27-wide trend, with rank 2 cities growing faster than rank 1 cities
                                                                   in the second and fourth period. Figure 3(c) shows instead that in most observed years
                                                                   rank 1 cities overperform with respect to rank 2 ones in NMS, with no clear trend of a
                                                                   rank 2 cities’ reprise. Clearly, this may depend either on a strong prevalence of rank 1
                                                                   cities in the process of wealth creation in NMS, or else on the relative lack of a well-struc-
                                                                   tured, well-interconnected network of rank 2 cities in these countries.7


                                                                    Graphical evidence does not find, however, unequivocal statistical support in classic t-tests
                                                                 for mean differences across groups, and this holds for all the four periods identified. This result
                                                                 strengthens the case for our empirical analyses, as it clearly shows that first-rank cities are not
                                                                 really leading national performance as superficially expected on the basis of their size and role
                                                                 in national economies, and points at the need to analyse the reasons why some second-rank
                                                                 cities have outperformed first-rank ones in the last 20 years. Thus, this work focuses on the
                                                                 two periods (2001–2004 and 2008–2009) when rank 2 cities grew faster than first-rank
                                                                 cities. In these periods, a dummy variable is calculated for second-rank cities, taking on
                                                                 value 1 if the metro area overperformed with respect to the country average GDP growth
                                                                 rate. The four periods identified in the data are shown in Table 1.


                                                                 4. The Model and the Data Description
                                                                 4.1. The Estimated Model
                                                                 The research questions mentioned in Section 2 are addressed by estimating an aggregate
                                                                 urban production function in the traditional neoclassical form of average location benefits
                                                                                                                  Rise of Second-Rank Cities   9




Downloaded by [Umeå University Library] at 23:07 02 April 2015




                                                                 Figure 3. Annual per capita GDP growth rates, 1996–2009, by city rank.
                                                                                     (a) EU27. (b) EU15. (c) NMS.
                                                                                      Source: authors’ elaboration.
                                                                 10    R. Camagni, R. Capello and A. Caragliu

                                                                             Table 1.   Periods observed in the data set used for the empirical analyses

                                                                                                            Period observed in the           Period observed in the
                                                                 Period                  Label               dependent variable              explanatory variables

                                                                 1995–2001              Growth                        –                               –
                                                                 2001–2004              Slowdown                     2004                       Av. 1998–2002
                                                                 2004–2008              Reprise                       –                               –
                                                                 2008–2009              Crisis                       2011                       Av. 2002–2006



                                                                 (henceforth, ALBs). ALB depend on the size of the city, measured through the absolute
                                                                 number of inhabitants, as most of the traditional literature developed (Catin, 1991;
                                                                 Marelli, 1981; Rousseau, 1995; Rousseau & Prud’homme, 1992; Segal, 1976; Sveikauskas




Downloaded by [Umeå University Library] at 23:07 02 April 2015
                                                                 et al., 1988). In order to discern between increasing or decreasing returns to scale, a quadratic
                                                                 form is imposed on the ALB by introducing the square population term in the model. More-
                                                                 over, networks and functions are expected to act on average benefits when they have
                                                                 achieved a certain critical mass of population, and this is captured by the interaction term
                                                                 between networks and functions, on the one hand, and population, on the other hand.
                                                                    The basic model estimated therefore reads as follows:


                                                                      ALB = const + b1 Pop + b2 Pop2 + b3 Pop∗ Functions + b4 Pop∗ Networks + 1,                (1)


                                                                 where “ALB” stands for average location benefit and “Pop” stands for population.
                                                                    A specific indicator of net urban advantage has been used in this work, i.e. urban rent,
                                                                 measured through house prices per square metre.8 Already used with the same purpose in
                                                                 other studies (Camagni & Pompili, 1991; Capello, 2002), this indicator is based on a
                                                                 crucial underlying hypothesis, i.e. that the differences in house prices between large and
                                                                 small cities measure their relative attractiveness (and thus their net localisation advan-
                                                                 tage), since they are the result of an evaluation made by the market of the “value” of
                                                                 these locations. For the same reason, the dynamics of urban house prices captures the
                                                                 changes in attractiveness of each location, and thus the dynamics of urban net advantage.9
                                                                    According to this logic, urban rent is a useful indicator of advantages and costs of differ-
                                                                 ent urban sizes, and of the existence of an optimal city size. This latter is the size which
                                                                 allows the achievement of the maximum net agglomeration advantages, estimated by the
                                                                 market as an “equilibrium rent level”. For urban areas larger than the optimal size, scale
                                                                 diseconomies would emerge, causing a relocation of residential and production activities,
                                                                 a decrease in city size and a consequent decrease in urban rent. In the same way, a city
                                                                 which is smaller than the optimal size would be characterised by lower rent levels,
                                                                 which would attract production and residential activities, causing an increase in city
                                                                 size and consequently an increase in urban rent.
                                                                    The outperforming small- and medium-sized cities with respect to the national average
                                                                 have been identified, and a dummy created for them. In order to analyse specificities of the
                                                                 outperforming cities with respect to the average behaviour, the basic model has been esti-
                                                                 mated again by introducing the interaction terms between the independent variables and
                                                                 the outperforming city dummies, as follows:
                                                                                                                              Rise of Second-Rank Cities      11

                                                                  ALB = const + b1 Pop + b2 Pop2 + b3 Pop∗ Functions + b4 Pop∗ networks + b5 Pop∗ D+
                                                                                   ∗
                                                                        + b6 Pop2 D + b7 Pop∗ Functions∗ D + b8 Pop∗ Networks∗ D + b9 D + 1.
                                                                                                                                                             (2)

                                                                 Equation (2) contains the interaction terms with D, which represents the relatively best
                                                                 performing cities with respect to the national average. An alternative version of model
                                                                 (2) entails the use of a measure of borrowed size, that aims at capturing the possibility
                                                                 that second-rank cities may have in fact borrowed the use of high-level urban functions
                                                                 and connectivity from large metro areas, irrespective of their own (relatively) small
                                                                 size. This implies that borrowed size partially substitutes functions and networks; if this
                                                                 is the case, an alternative model can be estimated, namely:10




Downloaded by [Umeå University Library] at 23:07 02 April 2015
                                                                             ALB = const + b1 Pop + b2 Pop2 + b3 D + b4 D∗ Pop + b5 D∗ Pop2
                                                                                                                                                             (3)
                                                                                 + b6 Borrowedsize + b7 D∗ Borrowedsize + 1.

                                                                 Before entering the estimation procedure, we present the database on which the model is
                                                                 estimated (Section 4.2).


                                                                 4.2. The Database
                                                                 In order to empirically test the research questions stated in Section 2, we assembled a novel
                                                                 data set which exploits the relatively recent release of metro area data from EUROSTAT.
                                                                 Table 2 summarizes the main sources of the data set assembled for the present analysis.
                                                                    The European statistical institute provides in fact a detailed definition of metropolitan
                                                                 statistical areas in Europe. In particular, data on metro regions are based on an aggregation
                                                                 of NUTS3 administrative regions with at least 250,000 inhabitants, in turn based on LUZ.
                                                                 As such, the aim of such statistical classification is to “correct the distortions created by
                                                                 commuting” by “including the commuter belt around a city” (Dijkstra, 2009, p. 1).11
                                                                    For these regions, we collected data on GDP in current prices and population from 1995
                                                                 to 2009. As for the latter, because the early years (1995– 2000) were missing from the data
                                                                 set, population in the NUTS3 regions forming metropolitan areas has been aggregated fol-
                                                                 lowing the official EUROSTAT classification. Finally, GDP data has been deflated with
                                                                 the EUROSTAT country-specific deflator, to obtain GDP in constant 2005 prices (net
                                                                 of within-country price variations, which cannot at the present state be fully eliminated).
                                                                    The data on GDP and population have been used to identify those cities that over—or
                                                                 underperformed with respect to the country mean (see the evidence presented in Section 3).
                                                                    Next, the data necessary to estimate the models presented in equation (2) have been col-
                                                                 lected. As explained in Section 4.1, urban land rent represents our measure of average urban
                                                                 location benefits. Land rent is here measured with the price per square metre of an average
                                                                 quality apartment located in the Central Business District of each city in the sample.
                                                                 The data, collected for the years 2004 and 2011, have been deflated with the same country defla-
                                                                 tor used for correcting GDP price distortions, in order to refer to constant 2005 prices.
                                                                    Moreover, data for high urban functions and city networks are also needed to test equation
                                                                 (2). For urban functions, the share of high-skilled professionals over the total population is
                                                                 used, from the micro database of EUROSTAT’s labour force survey, aggregated at the
                                                                 12     R. Camagni, R. Capello and A. Caragliu

                                                                                                            Table 2.    The data set

                                                                 Data                             Indicator                     Source of raw data           Years available

                                                                 GDP             Constant 2005 E GDP                            EUROSTAT                 1995–2009
                                                                 Population      Average yearly metro area population           EUROSTAT                 1995–2009
                                                                 Land rent       Prices of an average apartment                 EUROSTAT/Urban           2004, 2011
                                                                                   in the city’s CBD                              Audit, author’s
                                                                                                                                  integrationa
                                                                 High urban      Share of high-skilled professionals            Labour                   1995–2007 (average
                                                                   functions       over total populationb                         Force Survey             1998–2002 and
                                                                                                                                                           2002–2006 have
                                                                                                                                                           been calculated)
                                                                 City            Number of FP 5 and 6                           CORDIS                   1998–2002 (FP5)
                                                                   networks        co-participations                                                        2002–2006 (FP6)




Downloaded by [Umeå University Library] at 23:07 02 April 2015
                                                                 Source: Authors’ elaboration.
                                                                 a
                                                                  House prices data have been integrated through single national sources.
                                                                 b
                                                                   High-level functions are defined as the ISCO 88 category 1, encompassing “legislators, senior officials and
                                                                 managers”. Micro data have been aggregated at NUTS2 level, and the value of the NUTS2 region is assigned to
                                                                 the metro area. A full list of ISCO professions is available at http://laborsta.ilo.org/applv8/data/isco88e.html.

                                                                 NUTS2 level (see Table 1 for details). In order to measure urban networks, the approach used
                                                                 in Camagni et al. (2013) has been followed and urban networks are measured by the number
                                                                 of Framework Programme (henceforth, FP) 5 and 6 projects in which institutions of each sur-
                                                                 veyed city participated.12 This indicator has the advantage of capturing collaborations and
                                                                 exchange of knowledge, irrespective of the geographical distance between network nodes.
                                                                 As such, they represent a good proxy for the capability of a city to engage in long-distance
                                                                 networks aiming at fostering scientific cooperation, and represent a comprehensive
                                                                 measure of the quality and thickness of external urban networks (Basile et al., 2012, p. 710).
                                                                    Finally, borrowed size (viz. the accessibility of second-rank cities to functions and net-
                                                                 works typical of large urban areas) is calculated as the population in first-rank urban areas
                                                                 discounted by distance from each second-rank city. Borrowed size (equation (3) above) is
                                                                 therefore defined as:
                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                            n
                                                                                          Borrowedsizei = Wpop =                   popj wj ,   ∀j = i,                        (4)
                                                                                                                             j=1


                                                                 where i and j represent respectively second- and first-rank cities, W is an nXn distance
                                                                 weight matrix between second- and first-rank cities (each entry in the matrix is equal to
                                                                 0 if the two cities are second-rank or first-rank cities and equal to the inverse of the geo-
                                                                 graphical distance in kilometres if the two cities are cities one of second- and one of first-
                                                                 rank), and pop represents the vector of first-rank city populations.13


                                                                 5. An Interpretative Model of Urban Structural Dynamics of Small- and Medium-
                                                                 Sized Cities
                                                                 5.1. Outperforming Cities: Do Agglomeration Economies Play a Role?
                                                                 Table 3 reports the results of the estimates for the empirical model, and for equation (2).
                                                                 The results are presented in columns 1 – 4 for the second-rank cities of Western countries.
                                                                                                                                         Rise of Second-Rank Cities            13

                                                                                              Table 3.    Estimation results (random effects)

                                                                                                                          Average urban benefits (Log urban rent)
                                                                 Dep. variable
                                                                 Model                                              (1)             (2)              (3)               (4)

                                                                 Constant term                                  23.38            20.72           246.51            240.42
                                                                                                                (27.12)          (22.52)          (29.62)           (28.87)
                                                                 Metro area population                            1.38             1.17             7.84∗             7.06∗
                                                                                                                 (3.97)           (3.30)           (4.36)            (4.23)
                                                                 Metro area population2                         20.04            20.04            20.28∗            20.26∗
                                                                                                                 (0.14)           (0.12)           (0.16)            (0.16)
                                                                 D (outperforming second-rank cities)             0.06               –             55.78∗            51.29∗
                                                                                                                 (0.06)                           (33.05)           (32.60)
                                                                 D × metro area population                          –                –            28.47∗            27.76∗
                                                                                                                                                   (4.86)            (4.80)




Downloaded by [Umeå University Library] at 23:07 02 April 2015
                                                                 D × metro area population2                          –               –              0.32∗             0.30∗
                                                                                                                                                   (0.18)            (0.18)
                                                                 Functions                                           –             0.33∗∗∗           –                 –
                                                                                                                                  (0.04)
                                                                 Networks                                            –             0.02               –                 –
                                                                 Functions × metro population                        –               –                –               0.02∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                                                     (0.001)
                                                                 D × functions × metro population                    –               –                –               0.01∗
                                                                                                                                                                     (0.00)
                                                                 Networks × metro population                         –               –                –               0.003∗
                                                                                                                                                                     (0.00)
                                                                 D × networks × metro population                     –               –                –             20.004
                                                                                                                                                                     (0.003)
                                                                 Number of obs.                                 158             158               158               158
                                                                 Wald chi-square                                  6.51∗          80.85∗∗∗          27.20∗∗∗         324.96∗∗∗
                                                                 Breusch– Pagan test (OLS vs. RE)                15.82∗∗∗         7.05∗∗∗          16.78∗∗∗           7.01∗∗∗
                                                                                                                 (0.00)          (0.00)            (0.00)            (0.00)
                                                                 R-squared (within)                               0.07            0.29              0.13              0.37
                                                                 R-squared (between)                              0.04            0.43              0.06              0.44
                                                                 R-squared (overall)                              0.04            0.39              0.07              0.42
                                                                 Robust standard errors                           Yes             Yes               Yes               Yes

                                                                 Notes: All variables are in log. Dependent variable: average urban benefits (Log urban rent). Functions and
                                                                 networks variables are expressed in logs.
                                                                 Abbreviation: D—outperforming second-rank cities.
                                                                 ∗
                                                                   Significance at 1%.
                                                                 ∗∗
                                                                    Significance at 5%.
                                                                 ∗∗∗
                                                                     Significance at 10%.


                                                                 In fact, the model does not interpret the behaviour of all second-rank cities in Europe, tes-
                                                                 tifying that Eastern European second-rank cities have still a very peculiar dynamics that
                                                                 has no similarities to those of advanced countries (see Section 3 for descriptive figures).
                                                                    The results in columns 1 – 4 are obtained with random effects estimates. Fixed effects
                                                                 for single cities are conceptually refused in this exercise; besides, OLS estimates are stat-
                                                                 istically rejected, with the standard Breusch – Pagan test suggesting the appropriateness of
                                                                 random effects. Peculiarities for single cities in exploiting agglomeration advantages that
                                                                 do not depend on size, functions and networks neither exist, nor are expected to play a role.
                                                                 Also for western second-rank cities, the fit of the model is good (overall R2 ¼ 0.42).
                                                                 14   R. Camagni, R. Capello and A. Caragliu

                                                                    The first column shows that the inverted U-shaped curve of the location benefit curve
                                                                 does not hold for the whole sample of second-rank cities in western countries, and the
                                                                 result does not change when functions (significant in absolute terms) and networks are
                                                                 added. Column 3 instead presents interesting results. When the size of the city is multi-
                                                                 plied with a dummy representing the best outperforming second-rank cities, results
                                                                 become significant; while non-performing cities register a traditional inverted U-shaped
                                                                 form, implying an achievement of a threshold in terms of size-up to which decreasing
                                                                 returns are at work, fast-growing second-rank cities register decreasing returns up to a
                                                                 certain critical size, at which they start enjoying increasing returns. Lastly, column 4
                                                                 shows the estimates for our conceptual equation (2); with the exception of the networks
                                                                 in outperforming large cities, the coefficients have significant and expected signs.14
                                                                    Results are also presented in Figures. Figure 4 reports the ALB curve with respect to
                                                                 size. Many interesting messages are contained in this figure, namely:




Downloaded by [Umeå University Library] at 23:07 02 April 2015
                                                                 - for the general sample, the curve shows an inverted U-shape relationship (the continuous
                                                                   curve in Figure 4). An optimal size exists, after which economies of agglomeration turn
                                                                   into diseconomies, and this is true also for small- and medium-sized cities, as expected
                                                                   according to our first assumption;
                                                                 - when only the outperforming cities are analysed (dotted line in the figures), the ALB curve
                                                                   displays a U-shaped form, showing that increasing returns in size characterize best per-
                                                                   forming cities, i.e. agglomeration economies are associated with outperforming cities;
                                                                 - outperforming cities turn diseconomies of scale that characterize cities of their size in the
                                                                   sample into economies, by increasing the level of functions; as Figure 4 shows, second-




                                                                              Figure 4. Average urban location benefit curve for second-rank cities.
                                                                                                 Source: authors’ elaboration.
                                                                                                                                   Rise of Second-Rank Cities         15

                                                                       Table 4.     Optimal city size, critical size and level of functions for second-rank cities

                                                                 Optimal city size (no. of inhabitants) (maximum point of the benefit curve function)         714,973
                                                                 Critical size of outperforming cities turning diseconomies into economies of                 296,559
                                                                   agglomeration (minimum point of the benefit curve function of outperforming
                                                                   cities)
                                                                 Share of advanced functions and critical size necessary to outperforming cities to             7.5%
                                                                   achieve the same level of urban benefit than the other cities                             At a size of
                                                                                                                                                              545,000

                                                                 Source: Authors’ elaborations.


                                                                   rank outperforming cities manage to achieve the bifurcation point from the average
                                                                   sample for lower levels of functions than first-rank cities (dashed line);
                                                                 - higher intensities of high-value functions would shift the average location curve (as indi-




Downloaded by [Umeå University Library] at 23:07 02 April 2015
                                                                   cated for instance by the dotted line in Figure 4). This means that higher functions
                                                                   produce, ceteris paribus, higher location advantages.


                                                                    Table 4 reports the optimal city size, the critical size at which, for outperforming
                                                                 cities, diseconomies turn into economies and the level of high functions necessary to
                                                                 achieve the same level of urban benefits of the other cities. Optimal second-rank city
                                                                 size is achieved at around 700,000 inhabitants, and requires a critical size of around
                                                                 300,000 inhabitants.




                                                                    Figure 5. Marginal urban location benefits at different levels of high-value urban functions.
                                                                                                   Source: authors’ elaboration.
                                                                 16    R. Camagni, R. Capello and A. Caragliu

                                                                   As a final consideration, second-rank cities need 7.5% of employment in high-level
                                                                 functions and a size of 545,000 inhabitants. Therefore, small cities require a low intensity
                                                                 of high-level functions and a low size to gain increasing returns, as the SOUDY model
                                                                 theoretically explains.
                                                                   Our second hypothesis has been confirmed. Outperforming cities are the ones that are
                                                                 able to turn decreasing returns to scale into agglomeration economies. Moreover, increas-
                                                                 ing returns of outperforming cities are associated with higher-level functions.


                                                                 5.2. Exploitation of Agglomeration Economies: Do Functions Play a Role?
                                                                 The role of high-value functions in increasing the ALB curve has been presented in
                                                                 Figure 4. Our interest in this part of the analysis is to show if functions determine the inten-




Downloaded by [Umeå University Library] at 23:07 02 April 2015
                                                                 sity of agglomeration economies (Figure 5).15
                                                                    Figure 5 is helpful in this respect. It shows the way in which marginal location benefits
                                                                 change by increasing the high-value functions. For second-rank outperforming cities the


                                                                                                    Table 5.     Estimates of borrowed size

                                                                 Model                                                            (1)                  (2)                  (3)

                                                                 Constant term                                                246.51               259.32∗              249.95
                                                                                                                               (29.62)              (31.48)              (31.03)
                                                                 Metro area population                                           7.84∗                9.48∗∗               8.27∗
                                                                                                                                (4.36)               (4.54)               (4.49)
                                                                 Metro area population2                                        20.28∗               20.34∗∗              20.30∗
                                                                                                                                (0.16)               (0.17)               (0.16)
                                                                 Dummy rank 2 city outperfomed the country                      55.78∗               62.10∗               44.09∗
                                                                                                                               (33.05)              (33.09)              (30.13)
                                                                 Dummy rank 2 city outperfomed the                             28.47∗               29.40∗               27.24∗
                                                                   country × metro area population                              (4.86)               84.87)               (4.50)
                                                                 Dummy rank 2 city outperfomed the                               0.32∗                0.36∗∗               0.28∗
                                                                   country × metro area population2                             (0.18)               (0.18)               (0.16)
                                                                 Borrowed size                                                    –                   0.12                 0.04
                                                                                                                                                     (0.11)               (0.10)
                                                                 Rank 2 city outperfomed the                                       –                                       0.25∗
                                                                   country × borrowed size                                                                                (0.15)
                                                                 Number of obs.                                                158                  158                 158
                                                                 Wald x2 test                                                    4.16∗∗∗             30.15∗∗∗             36.19∗∗∗
                                                                 Breusch– Pagan test (OLS vs. RE)                               16.78∗∗∗             16.90∗∗∗             18.01∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                (0.00)               (0.00)               (0.00)
                                                                 R-squared                                                       0.07                 0.07                 0.07
                                                                 Within                                                          0.13                 0.15                 0.18
                                                                 Between                                                         0.06                 0.06                 0.06
                                                                 Robust standard errors                                          Yes                  Yes                  Yes
                                                                 Estimation technique                                            RE                   RE                   RE

                                                                 Notes: All variables are in log. Dependent variable: average urban benefits (Log urban rent). Standard errors are in
                                                                 parentheses.
                                                                 Abbreviation: RE—random effects estimates.
                                                                 ∗
                                                                   Significance at 1%.
                                                                 ∗∗
                                                                    Significance at 5%.
                                                                 ∗∗∗
                                                                     Significance at 10%.
                                                                                                                              Rise of Second-Rank Cities      17

                                                                 role of functions in marginal urban benefits is high, but the intensity of the effect (the slope
                                                                 of the line) remains constant as the intensity of functions increases.



                                                                 5.3. Exploitation of Agglomeration Economies: Does Borrowed Size Play a Role?
                                                                 In this section, the empirical analyses presented above are complemented with a specific
                                                                 analysis of the role of the cities’ capability of borrowing size from nearby large metro
                                                                 areas in fostering agglomeration economies. Table 5 shows the estimates of the baseline
                                                                 model, which, for convenience, is repeated in column 1, and of the model in eq. (3),
                                                                 which encompasses borrowed size (column 2) and the interaction term between borrowed
                                                                 size and the dummy for outperforming second-rank cities (column 3).
                                                                    As anticipated in Section 4, Table 5 presents results where high-level urban functions




Downloaded by [Umeå University Library] at 23:07 02 April 2015
                                                                 and city networks are substituted by borrowed size. The results suggest that, after control-
                                                                 ling for the other main determinants of location benefits, while borrowed size does not
                                                                 suffice to allow higher benefits (column 2), it acts as a catalyst for second-rank cities
                                                                 that outperformed with respect to the country mean (column 3). Thus, the hypothesis is
                                                                 that such cities can actually borrow functions and networks located in large urban areas,
                                                                 but without incurring the costs typically associated with locations in large urban areas.
                                                                    This finding can be further evidenced graphically. This is done in Figure 6, where ALBs
                                                                 are plotted against the measure of borrowed size, along with confidence intervals calcu-
                                                                 lated for the quintiles of borrowed size distribution.
                                                                    Figure 6 suggests that indeed as second-rank cities can increasingly get access to the
                                                                 functions and networks hosted by large metro areas, their ALB increase even if those func-




                                                                                 Figure 6. Marginal location benefits as borrowed size increases.
                                                                                                 Source: authors’ calculations.
                                                                 18   R. Camagni, R. Capello and A. Caragliu

                                                                 tions and networks are not located within the city itself. This interesting finding paves the
                                                                 way for possible future research aiming at explaining the conditions for such polycentric
                                                                 urban structure to emerge and succeed. In fact, it could be argued that other characteristics
                                                                 of urban systems influence the capacity of a second-rank urban areas to profitably benefit
                                                                 from being close to large metro areas.



                                                                 6. Conclusions
                                                                 By entering the debate on the reasons for the recent relatively better performance of
                                                                 second-rank cities with respect to first-rank ones on the national dynamics, the present
                                                                 work has been able to demonstrate that some general common beliefs on the determinants
                                                                 of urban growth are too simplistic.




Downloaded by [Umeå University Library] at 23:07 02 April 2015
                                                                    The success of cities is generally attributed to the existence of agglomeration economies
                                                                 and, by the same token, the urban decline is explained by the loss of increasing returns when
                                                                 a city achieves an excessive size. Starting from existing theoretical approaches, this paper
                                                                 proves that the existence of agglomeration economies is undeniable, as well as the risk of
                                                                 agglomeration diseconomies. However, as theoretically suggested, this paper empirically
                                                                 shows that cities are able to overcome diseconomies of scale either through innovating in
                                                                 the functions that they perform, or in the organization of activities with other cities,
                                                                 through city networking. Besides, such a finding is complemented by the empirical verifi-
                                                                 cation that cities can “borrow size” from neighbouring large metro areas, thus getting access
                                                                 to the functions and networks there hosted, without incurring high location disadvantages.
                                                                    In fact, our empirical study has shown that outperforming cities are the ones that are
                                                                 characterized by economies of scale, and that these economies of scale are related to
                                                                 the level of functions and networks that cities have or, in other words, their capacity to
                                                                 borrow size from large metro areas.
                                                                    These results have important urban policy implications. Concerning the recent ques-
                                                                 tion raised whether in a period of crisis like the present one, policy-makers should con-
                                                                 centrate their limited resources in their large cities in order to exploit agglomeration
                                                                 economies, or spread their investment in a larger set of cities, the reply comes very
                                                                 easily after the results of this exercise. Investment should be devoted to cities in order
                                                                 to make any of them, irrespective of their size, be able to turn their risk of decreasing
                                                                 returns into agglomeration economies, by investing in renovating their functions and
                                                                 their way of cooperation.


                                                                 Notes
                                                                      1. An alternative way to explain the efficiency of second-rank cities goes through the role of size borrowing
                                                                         from nearby large metro areas, hosting high-level functions and being connected in transnational net-
                                                                         works, as suggested in Alonso (1973). See Camagni et al. (2013).
                                                                      2. More details on the empirical approach to the definition of urban rank and the relative performance of
                                                                         second-rank cities with respect to larger metro areas in the last 15 years are provided in Section 3.
                                                                      3. Richardson (1972) suggests replacing the concept of optimal city size with an efficient interval of urban
                                                                         size in which urban marginal benefits are greater than marginal location costs.
                                                                      4. The two cities will differ, though, in dynamic terms: the one belonging to the lower rank 1 will not grow
                                                                         further, having reached the maximum size of its interval, while the one having developed the higher
                                                                         functions (linked to rank 2) will grow, due to the presence of new and wide net urban benefits (profits).
                                                                                                                                            Rise of Second-Rank Cities              19

                                                                      5. Camagni (1993) theorised the concept applying it to urban systems. The same concept was already
                                                                         utilised in other fields, such as the behaviour of the firm and microeconomic organisational behaviour.
                                                                         For a review of the concept, see Capello and Rietveld (1998).
                                                                      6. In another paper, the same authors show that these features are common to cities of different size,
                                                                         demonstrating that cities grow according to the same structural laws, but with some specificities
                                                                         (Camagni et al., 2013).
                                                                      7. For this reason, in the empirical analysis (Section 5), rank 2 cities will only be analysed in EU15
                                                                         countries. The trends above discussed allow the identification of four periods within the 1995– 2009
                                                                         time span observed in this paper.
                                                                      8. Urban rent is usually interpreted as the rent paid to the house owner. However, house prices represent the
                                                                         capitalized rent over time, and for this reason may be chosen as a proxy for urban rent.
                                                                      9. In dynamic terms, the reasoning requires another important hypothesis. Since the analysis is developed
                                                                         in relative and not absolute terms, between different cities or between core and ring areas, it is assumed
                                                                         that for each relative dimension (large vs. small cities, ring vs. core), the supply curve of houses has the
                                                                         same slope. If this were not the case, a shift upwards of the demand curve, generated by a higher appreci-




Downloaded by [Umeå University Library] at 23:07 02 April 2015
                                                                         ation of location advantages, would give rise to a different increase in prices. This hypothesis does not
                                                                         limit too much the comparison between large and small cities, but could give a heavy bias in a compari-
                                                                         son between core and ring areas because of the different potential for the expansion of residential supply
                                                                         in the two areas.
                                                                     10. Interestingly enough, when a measure for borrowed size is inserted in our estimated model, multicolli-
                                                                         nearity exists among borrowed size from one side, and functions and networks on the other.
                                                                     11. A full list of cities surveyed in this paper is available in the appendix.
                                                                     12. Clearly, this indicator represents only a subset of all possible ways of transnational networking for the
                                                                         surveyed urban areas, and in particular refers to a scientific type of connectivity (thus reflecting an inno-
                                                                         vation-oriented type of knowledge being exchanged via these connections). However, this is perfectly in
                                                                         line with the scope of this analysis, and fits much better the aims of the empirical work here presented,
                                                                         rather than the use of more classical (and geographically based) networks of physical accessibility.
                                                                     13. The bar notation indicates a vector.
                                                                     14. The non-interacted variables “networks” and “functions” have not entered this equation; lacking degrees
                                                                         of freedom, we preferred to keep the specification that is conceptually the most interesting for us.
                                                                     15. Networks turned out to be insignificant, and for this reason they are not treated in this part. Their role will
                                                                         be highlighted when a diachronic analysis is developed. See Section 5.3.



                                                                 References
                                                                 Alonso, W. (1973) Urban zero population growth, Daedalus, 102(4), pp. 191–206.
                                                                 Basile, R., Capello, R. & Caragliu, A. (2012) Technological interdependence and regional growth in Europe:
                                                                      Proximity and synergy in knowledge spillovers, Papers in Regional Science, 91(4), pp. 697 –722.
                                                                 Burger, M. J., Meijers, E. J. & Van Oort, F. G. (2013) Regional spatial structure and retail amenities in the Nether-
                                                                      lands, Regional Studies, doi: 10.1080/00343404.2013.783693
                                                                 Burger, M. J., Meijers, E. J., Hoogerbrugge, M. M. & Tresserra, J. M. (2014) Borrowed size, agglomeration
                                                                      shadows and cultural amenities in North-West Europe, European Planning Studies, http://dx.doi.org/10.
                                                                      1080/09654313.2014.905002.
                                                                 Camagni, R. (1993) From city hierarchy to city networks: Reflection about an emerging paradigm, in: T. Laksh-
                                                                      manan & P. Nijkamp (Eds) Structure and Change in the Space Economy: Festschrifts in Honour of Martin
                                                                      Beckmann, pp. 66– 87 (Berlin: Springer Verlag).
                                                                 Camagni, R. (2001) The economic role and spatial contradictions of global city-regions: The functional, cognitive
                                                                      and evolutionary context, in: A. J. Scott (Ed.) Global City-Regions: Trends, Theory, Policy, pp. 96– 118
                                                                      (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
                                                                 Camagni, R. & Capello, R. (2004) The city network paradigm: Theory and empirical evidence, in: R. Capello &
                                                                      P. Nijkamp (Eds) Urban Dynamics and Growth: Advances in Urban Economics, pp. 495– 532 (Amsterdam:
                                                                      Elsevier).
                                                                 Camagni, R. & Pompili, T. (1991) La rendita fondiaria come indicatore della dinamica urbana: un’indagine
                                                                      empirica sul caso italiano, in: F. Boscacci & G. Gorla (Eds) Economie locali in ambiente competitivo,
                                                                      pp. 41– 66 (Milan: Franco Angeli).
                                                                 20    R. Camagni, R. Capello and A. Caragliu

                                                                 Camagni, R., Diappi, L. & Leonardi, G. (1986) Urban growth and decline in a hierarchical system: A supply-
                                                                      oriented dynamic approach, Regional Science and Urban Economics, 16(1), pp. 145– 160.
                                                                 Camagni, R., Capello, R. & Caragliu, A. (2013) One or infinite optimal city sizes? In search of an equilibrium size
                                                                      for cities, The Annals of Regional Science, 51(2), pp. 309–341.
                                                                 Capello, R. (2000) The city network paradigm: Measuring urban network externalities, Urban Studies, 37(11),
                                                                      pp. 1925–1945.
                                                                 Capello, R. (2002) Urban rent and urban dynamics: The determinants of urban development in Italy, The Annals
                                                                      of Regional Science, 36(4), pp. 593–611.
                                                                 Capello, R. & Rietveld, P. (1998) The concept of network synergy in economic theory: Policy implications,
                                                                      in: K. Button P. Nijkamp & H. Priemus (Eds) Transport Networks in Europe, pp. 57–83 (Cheltenham:
                                                                      Edward Elgar).
                                                                 Catin, M. (1991) Économies d’Agglomération et Gains de Productivité, Revue d’Économie Régionale et Urbaine,
                                                                      5, pp. 565– 598.
                                                                 Chesnais, F. (1988) Technical Co-operation Agreements Between Firms, STI Review, Vol. 4 (Paris: OECD).
                                                                 Conti, S. & Dematteis, G. (1995) Enterprises, systems and network dynamics: The challenge of complexity,




Downloaded by [Umeå University Library] at 23:07 02 April 2015
                                                                      in: S. Conti, E. Malecki & P. Oinas (Eds) The Industrial Enterprise and Its Environment: Spatial Perspec-
                                                                      tives, Avebury, Aldershot, pp. 217–242 (London: Sage).
                                                                 Dijkstra, L. (2009) Metropolitan regions in the EU, Regional Focus, 1/2009, pp. 1– 9.
                                                                 Dijkstra, L., Garcilazo, E. & McCann, P. (2013) The economic performance of European cities and city regions:
                                                                      Myths and realities, European Planning Studies, 21(3), pp. 334–354.
                                                                 Glaeser, E. L. (2008) Cities, Agglomeration and Spatial Equilibrium (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
                                                                 Glaeser, E. L. (2011) Triumph of the City: How Our Greatest Invention Makes Us Richer, Smarter, Greener,
                                                                      Healthier, and Happier (New York: Penguin Books).
                                                                 Glaeser, E. L., Kallal, H., Scheinkman, J. A. & Shleifer, A. (1992) Growth in cities, Journal of Political Economy,
                                                                      100(6), pp. 1126– 1152.
                                                                 Henderson, J. (1974) The sizes and types of cities, The American Economic Review, 64(4), pp. 640– 656.
                                                                 Henderson, J. (1985) Economic Theory and the Cities (Orlando, FL: Academic Press).
                                                                 Henderson, J. (1996) Ways to think about urban concentration: Neoclassical urban systems vs. the new economic
                                                                      geography, International Regional Science Review, 19(1&2), pp. 31–36.
                                                                 Henderson, J. (2010) Cities and development, Journal of Regional Science, 50(1), pp. 515–540.
                                                                 Krugman, P. (1991) Geography and Trade (Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press).
                                                                 Marelli, E. (1981) Optimal city size, the productivity of cities and urban production functions, Sistemi Urbani,
                                                                      1/2, pp. 149– 163.
                                                                 McCann, Ph. & Acs, Z. J. (2011) Globalization: Countries, Cities and Multinationals, Regional Studies, 45(1),
                                                                      pp. 17– 32.
                                                                 Meijers, E. J. & Burger, M. J. (2010) Spatial structure and productivity in US metropolitan areas, Environment
                                                                      and Planning A, 42(6), pp. 1383–1402.
                                                                 Nijkamp, P. & Kourtit, K. (2011) New urban Europe: A place 4 all, Urban Governance in the EU. Current Challenges
                                                                      and Future Prospects, pp. 61–76 (Brussels: Committee of the Regions, European Commission, DG RTD).
                                                                 Nijkamp, P. & Kourtit, K. (2012) The new urban Europe: Global challenges and local responses in the urban
                                                                      century, European Planning Studies, 21(3), pp. 291–315.
                                                                 Parkinson, M., Meegan, R. & Karecha, J. (2014) City size and economic performance: Is bigger better, small
                                                                      more beautiful or middling marvellous? European Planning Studies, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09654313.
                                                                      2014.904998
                                                                 Parr, J. B. (2002) Agglomeration economies: Ambiguities and confusions, Environment and Planning A, 34(4),
                                                                      pp. 717– 731.
                                                                 Phelps, N. A., Fallon, R. J., & Williams, C. L. (2001) Small firms, borrowed size and the urban-rural shift,
                                                                      Regional Studies, 35(7), pp. 613–624.
                                                                 Richardson, H. (1972) Optimality in city size, systems of cities and urban policy: A sceptic’s view, Urban Studies,
                                                                      9(1), pp. 29– 47.
                                                                 Rosenthal, S. S. & Strange, W. C. (2004) Evidence on the nature and sources of agglomeration economies, in:
                                                                      J. Vernon Henderson & Jacques-Francois Thisse (Eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics,
                                                                      Vol. 4 Cities and Geography, pp. 2119– 2171 (Amsterdam: Elsevier).
                                                                 Rousseau M.-P. (1995) Y a-t-il une surproductivité de l’Île de France? in: M. Savy & P. Veltz (Eds) Économie
                                                                      globale et Réinvention du Local, pp. 157– 167 (Paris: DATAR/éditions de l’aube).
                                                                                                                                         Rise of Second-Rank Cities            21

                                                                 Rousseau, M.-P. & Proud’homme, R. (1992) Les avantages de la concentration parisienne (Paris, FR: L’OEIL-
                                                                      IAURIF).
                                                                 Sassen, S. (Ed.) (2002) Global Networks, Linked Cities (New York: Routledge).
                                                                 Scott, A. J. (Ed.) (2001) Global City-Regions: Trends, Theory, Policy (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
                                                                 Segal, D. (1976) Are there returns to scale in city size? Review of Economics and Statistics, 58(3), pp. 339– 350.
                                                                 Sveikauskas, L., Gowdy, J. & Funk, M. (1988) Urban productivity: City size or industry size, Journal of Regional
                                                                      Science, 28(2), pp. 185– 202.
                                                                 Veneri, P. & Burgalassi, D. (2012) Questioning polycentric development and its effects. Issues of definition and
                                                                      measurement for the Italian NUTS-2 regions, European Planning Studies, 20(6), pp. 1017–1037.
                                                                 Williamson, O. E. (1985) The Economic Institution of Capitalism (New York: The Free Press).


                                                                 Appendix. Details on the database
                                                                 The database for the empirical analyses in this paper comprises the following 100 metro
                                                                 areas:




Downloaded by [Umeå University Library] at 23:07 02 April 2015
                                                                    Århus, Aalborg, Aberdeen, Antwerpen, Arnhem, Augsburg, Bari, Belfast, Bilbao,
                                                                 Bologna, Bordeaux, Bremen, Bristol, Brno, Bydgoszcz, Caen, Cagliari, Cardiff, Charleroi,
                                                                 Clermont-Ferrand, Cluj-Napoca, Craiova, Czestochowa, Dijon, Dresden, Edinburgh,
                                                                 Eindhoven, Enschede, Erfurt, Exeter, Firenze, Freiburg im Breisgau, Gdansk, Genova,
                                                                 Gent, Graz, Groningen, Göteborg, Göttingen, Halle an der Saale, Hannover, Karlsruhe,
                                                                 Kiel, Kielce, Kingston-upon-Hull, Koblenz, Kosice, Kraków, Palmas/Sta. Cruz de Tener-
                                                                 ife, Lefkosia, Leicester, Lille, Linz, Liverpool, Liège, Luxembourg, Lódz, Malmö,
                                                                 Maribor, Montpellier, Murcia, Nancy/Metz, Nantes, Napoli, Newcastle upon Tyne, Not-
                                                                 tingham, Nürnberg, Ostrava, Oviedo, Palermo, Palma de Mallorca, Pamplona/Iruña,
                                                                 Plovdiv, Plzen, Porto, Portsmouth, Poznan, Regensburg, Rennes, Riga, Rostock, Santan-
                                                                 der, Sevilla, Sheffield, Stoke-on-Trent, Strasbourg, Szczecin, Tallinn, Tampere, Thessalo-
                                                                 niki, Timisoara, Toulouse, Turku, Valencia, Valletta, Varna, Venezia, Vilnius, Wroclaw,
                                                                 Zaragoza.
                                                                    Data encompass two observations per city, with the time coverage described in Section 4.
