[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: journal/B12-parkinson-meegan-karecha-2015-city-size-and-economic-performance-is-bigger-better-small-more-beautiful-or-middling-marvellous-10.1080-09654313.2014.904998.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Title:           City Size and Economic Performance: Is Bigger Better, Small More Beautiful or Middling Marvellous?
Subject:         European Planning Studies, 2014. doi:10.1080/09654313.2014.904998
Author:          MICHAEL PARKINSON
Creator:         Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.1.520/W
Producer:        Acrobat Distiller 8.1.0 (Windows); modified using iTextSharp™ 5.4.5 ©2000-2013 1T3XT BVBA (AGPL-version)
CreationDate:    Sat Apr 11 01:39:30 2015 WIB
ModDate:         Sat Apr 11 01:39:30 2015 WIB
Custom Metadata: no
Metadata Stream: yes
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            none
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           16
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       493.228 x 702.992 pts
Page rot:        0
File size:       573888 bytes
Optimized:       yes
PDF version:     1.6
[Extracted Text]
European Planning Studies, 2015
Vol. 23, No. 6, 1054– 1068, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09654313.2014.904998




City Size and Economic Performance: Is
Bigger Better, Small More Beautiful or
Middling Marvellous?

MICHAEL PARKINSON, RICHARD MEEGAN & JAY KARECHA

European Institute for Urban Affairs, Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, UK



(Received August 2013; accepted December 2013)



ABSTRACT This article discusses the contribution that second-tier cities can and do make to the
economic performance of national economies across Europe. It reviews the competing theories
about size, investment and economic performance. It presents a range of evidence about the
performance of over 150 European capital and second-tier cities in 31 countries. It identifies
some key policy messages for local national and European policy-makers. It presents evidence
that decentralizing responsibilities, powers and resources, spreading investment and encouraging
high performance in a range of cities rather than concentrating on the capital city produces
national benefits. It argues that in a period of austerity national governments should resist
pressures to concentrate investment in capital cities and invest more in second-tier cities when
there is evidence that: (i) the gap with capitals is large and growing (ii) the business
infrastructure of second-tier cities is weak because of national underinvestment and (iii) there is
clear evidence about the negative externalities of capital city growth. It argues that the issues
have slipped down the European Commission’s agenda and it should do more to ensure its
strategies help realize the economic potential of second-tier cities in future.



1. The Recession Makes the Discussion of City Size More Important
This special edition focuses upon the economic contribution and performance of different-
sized cities across Europe. The issues have always been academically significant, but the
current recession makes them even more significant politically. They have sharpened
the debate about policies for national competitiveness. They have also sharpened the
debate about the economic contribution of capital and second-tier cities and whether
countries perform better if they concentrate their investment in their national capitals or
spread investment across a wider set of cities. Does size matter—and how much—for

Correspondence Address: Michael Parkinson, European Institute for Urban Affairs, Liverpool John Moores
University, Liverpool, UK. Emails: m.h.parkinson@ljmu.ac.uk, michael.parkinson@liverpool.ac.uk


# 2014 Istituto Regionale Programmazione Economica della Toscana IRPET. All Rights Reserved.
                                              City Size and Economic Performance        1055

cities and national economic performance? They pose a single crucial question: “Why
should policy-makers invest beyond the capital cities in an age of austerity?” In the
recent past a major focus of academic research has been on the larger global cites
(Sassen, 2001, 2012; Brenner & Keil, 2006). However, the new economic conditions
mean policy-makers will have to pay more attention in future to the potential and actual
contribution of cities further down the urban hierarchy—the second-tier cities.
   The global recession and Eurozone crisis have had a huge impact upon the European
economy and present great future threats. This debate will become more important
during the next decade as the crisis threatens to undermine the real achievements made
by many European cities. In the past decade, cities in many countries improved their econ-
omic performance and made a growing contribution to national competitiveness. But it
was a result of high-performing national economies and substantial investment of
public resources. Those conditions will not be found during the next decade. Many under-
lying economic and social problems in cities—which had been masked by the boom—
have already been intensified by the crisis. There is a risk that economic and fiscal pro-
blems and the competition for scarce public and private sector resources will limit the
growth of cities and widen economic and social gaps within them and between them
and the capitals. The investment that was made during the growth years before the
crash paid off, improving the economic performance and national contribution of many
second-tier cities. It is crucial that the investment that was made—and which is now at
risk in the recession—is not lost. The argument is essentially one about investment and
economic performance as much as territorial justice.
   This article explores some of the policy and research questions raised by this debate,
based upon a major study we recently conducted of European cities in the age of austerity.


2. What Are the Analytical Arguments About City Size, Investment and Economic
Performance—Place-Neutral vs. “Place-Based” Policies?
2.1. Competing Theories
There has been a rediscovery of the importance of agglomeration and urbanization econ-
omies and externalities in urban and regional economic growth. A number of different
theoretical frameworks compete for attention including, notably, neo-classically based
endogenous growth theory, geographical economics and institutional and evolutionary
theories. Geographical economics and the so-called “New Economic Geography” focus,
for example, on the external economies and increasing returns to scale associated with
regional industrial specialization and concentration and the urbanization economies
from agglomeration of firms from different industries that underpin the growth of urban
locations (Krugman, 1990, 1991, 1993; Fujita et al., 1999; Duranton & Puga, 2004;
Kitson et al., 2004; World Bank, 2009). Agglomeration economies also feature in
macro-structural economic transition theories which link local and regional growth poten-
tial to the transition from the macro-economic era of mass production to the current era of
“flexible specialisation” (Piore & Sabel, 1984; Storper & Scott, 1988; Scott, 1988). Insti-
tutional and evolutionary theories of regional economic development have focused on the
institutional arrangements and “softer” factors like networking, trust and social capital that
together provide externalities that encourage the emergence and subsequent growth of
local and regional economies (Grabher, 1993; Amin & Thrift, 1995; Maskell, 2002).
1056   M. Parkinson, R. Meegan & J. Karecha

2.2. Competing Policy Paradigms
These theoretical differences translate into different policy recommendations. Free market
neo-classical economists stress the importance of agglomeration economies as the justifi-
cation for allowing capital cities to grow in an unrestricted fashion to reflect market
demand and forces. In this view, capital cities have significant agglomeration advantages.
They are typically the centres of national political, administrative and economic power.
They have stronger private sectors. They are more integrated into global networks.
They are more likely to contain companies’ headquarters. Their producer services are typi-
cally the most advanced. They contain major financial institutions which provide easier
access to risk capital. They contain leading academic and research institutions. They are
at the hub of national transportation and ICT networks. They attract public and private
“prestige” investment because they “represent” their nations. Henderson, for example,
argues that capital cities receive preferential treatment from national governments
because public decision-makers find it easier to allocate resources to existing capitals
rather than identify opportunities elsewhere (Henderson, 2010). Similarly, it has been
argued that private sector investors adopt the safer strategy of investing in buoyant,
capital locations rather than taking risks with more distant, perhaps more economically
marginal locations.
   The neo-classical position also encourages a “place-neutral” approach to economic
development best illustrated in the World Bank’s arguments that that policies should
emphasize people over place and that, because growth and development are inevitably
unbalanced, it is counterproductive to attempt to shift that market balance (World Bank,
2009). Urban and regional development policy should emphasize “space-blind” provision
of universal public services like education and social services and general infrastructure
investment with only very limited use of explicitly spatially targeted interventions
(Hildreth & Bailey, 2013).
   The “place-neutral” approach is challenged from an institutional and evolutionary
economic geography perspective, which emphasizes the costs and negative externalities
of agglomeration. Agglomeration clearly produces economic benefits. However, the econ-
omic benefits of agglomeration are not unlimited. Capital cities can reach a point where
diseconomies make them less competitive because of the negative externalities caused by
unregulated growth and diminishing marginal returns. The OECD has made a significant
contribution to this debate with a series of studies exploring the contribution of different
regions to national competitiveness. Some of its recent work has focussed specifically
upon the middle regions, showing that growth does not come only from a small
number of leading regions at the top but from the many more regions further down a
long territorial tail of the regional hierarchy, whose collective contribution is crucial.
OECD’s policy position is that the economic contribution of the middle regions is typi-
cally underestimated and governments should do more to maximize their contribution
if they want to maximize national competitiveness (OECD, 2006, 2012a, 2012b; Garci-
lazo et al., 2010).
   From this perspective, urban and regional policies need to be more sensitive to local
context and local specificity, “place-based” as opposed to “place neutral” (Barca, 2009;
Barca & McCann, 2010; McCann & Ortega-Argilés, 2011; McCann & Rodrı́guez-Pose,
2011; Barca et al., 2012). “Bottom-up” policies that take into consideration, for
example, the localized forces that influence innovation and development are
                                              City Size and Economic Performance        1057

needed, albeit reconciled with “top-down” policies in an approach to urban and regional
development issues from a meso-level perspective (Crescenzi & Rodrı́guez-Pose, 2011).
The emphasis on “place-based” policy also explains the growing demand for decentraliza-
tion of powers from national to sub-national governments (Ascani et al., 2012). Our work
supports this latter view.

3. What Was the Economic Contribution of Capital and Second-Tier Cities in the
European Boom and Recession?
This article draws on a recent study for ESPON of 124 second-tier and 31 capital cities
across Europe (Parkinson et al., 2012; Parkinson & Meegan, 2013). There are many typol-
ogies of cities. All have their limitations. We use the concept of second-tier cities—those
cities outside the capital whose economic and social performance is sufficiently important
to affect the potential performance of the national economy. It does not imply that they are
less important than the capital cities. It certainly does not mean that they are second class.
And it does not mean they are the “second” city—because there is only one of these in each
country. And second-tier cities are not all the same—they vary enormously. Sometimes
they are very large regional capitals. Sometimes they are the second largest city of the
country with huge national significance—for example Barcelona, Munich and Lyon.
But many are much smaller. However, while they differ in many respects, second-tier
cities can play comparable national economic roles. The second-tier cities we studied in
the research for ESPON constitute almost 80% of Europe’s metropolitan urban population.
They lie between the capital cities which contribute a huge amount to their national
economy and the many smaller places which contribute rather less. They are the middle
of the urban system.
   We recognize that the distinction between capital and second-tier cities is an adminis-
trative rather than a functional one. However, we use it at least partly because a key policy
concern of our work is the extent to which national governments focus attention and
resources on their capitals rather than on other cities in their urban system—and the con-
sequences for national economic performance. There is some argument that they do so
(Henderson, 2010). Also this is a hugely significant policy issue for the European Commis-
sion who commissioned the research. They were aware that many member states,
especially in the east of Europe, favoured investing EU resources in their capital cities
on the grounds it would lead to greater national economic gains. We wanted to test that
argument. However, although partly an administrative distinction, in the vast bulk of
countries the capital is by far the largest city economically and demographically. So we
are effectively examining relationships between economically dominant cities and their
urban systems in European countries. We recognize this is not the first time this
concept has been used. Markusen et al. (1999) looked at the phenomenon of second-tier
cities. However, their work primarily focussed on non-European cities and they were typi-
cally more recently developed and often smaller cities than ours. This work adds new
information and develops the concept.

3.1. Decentralization and Deconcentration Matter
What are our key messages? Our evidence shows that decentralizing responsibilities,
powers and resources, spreading investment and encouraging high performance in a
1058   M. Parkinson, R. Meegan & J. Karecha

range of cities rather than concentrating on the capital city produces national benefits. In
terms of policy, some countries concentrate attention and resources on the capitals at the
expense of their second-tier cities. But many are beginning to develop policies which
explicitly target second tiers. More widely, in some countries mainstream national pol-
icies which implicitly affect urban competitiveness—innovation, diversity, skills, con-
nectivity, place quality and strategic governance capacity—have been used to help
second-tier cities develop. Most interestingly, in countries which are less centralized
and less economically concentrated, and where cities have greater powers, resources
and responsibilities, cities have performed better and helped the national economy
more. There is evidence that levels of government decentralization do matter.
Between 2000 and 2007 for example, in the Federal states, all German and Austrian
and half of Belgium’s second-tier cities outperformed their capitals. In the regionalized
states, all Spanish and a third of Italian second-tier cities grew faster than their capitals.
In the Nordic states, all grew faster than their capital. In the unitary centralized states of
Hungary, Hungary, Slovakia, Slovenia, Estonia, Lithuania and Bulgaria all second-tier
cities and all but one in the Czech Republic had lower growth rates than their capital
cities. Only in Romania, Latvia and Croatia did some second-tier cities outperform
their capital.
   Our study and this article argue that continuing over-investment in capital cities and
under-investment in second-tier cities in the long run will be unsustainable and lead to
economic under-performance. It finds much evidence that decentralizing responsibil-
ities, powers and resources, spreading investment and encouraging high performance
in a range of cities rather than concentrating on the capital city produces national
benefits. Although the capital cities in many countries are responsible for a significant
proportion of national GDP, second-tier cities still make a large contribution. In many
cases the collective economic contribution that second-tier cities make is greater
than that of the capital itself. Individually, second-tier cities may lag behind
capitals. But collectively their contribution to national economic performance is
hugely significant.
   However, we do not claim, and our evidence does not show, that every second-tier city
in every country performed well in the boom or recession or that they outperform the
capital city. But enough cities in enough countries have performed well enough to chal-
lenge the assumption that capital cities should be the first choice for investment to
achieve national economic success. Our work does present a huge amount of compelling
evidence from quantitative data analysis, policy reviews and individual city studies that
point in the same direction. We can only present a limited amount of that quantitative evi-
dence in this article. They cumulatively demonstrate that policy-makers should take these
issues more seriously in future and systematically examine how their decisions affect
second-tier cities.

3.2. Germany Proves the Point
Germany provides important lessons on the economic role of second-tier cities. Of course
Germany is unique. It is a Federal system which has changed its capital. The country has
been divided and reunited. Its-second-tier cities are typically state capitals with extensive
powers and resources. It has a unique system of regional banking and powerful middle-
sized firms. It is not possible for other European countries to simply imitate the structural
                                               City Size and Economic Performance         1059

characteristics of the German system. Nevertheless, the key principles of the German
experience can be transferred between different countries. Its experience particularly
underlines the argument that decentralization of powers and resources and the spatial
deconcentration of investment leads to a higher performing national economy. Economic
activity—private and public—is more evenly distributed across a range of cities that form
a powerful multi-cylinder, economic engine. Between 2000 and 2007 populations
increased faster in six German second-tier cities than in Berlin. All its 14 second-tier
cities had productivity growth rates above those in Berlin. At a European level, 5 of the
top 10 second tiers in GDP growth between 2000 and 2007 were German. Five of the
top ten most innovative cities were German.

3.3. Capital Cities Dominate but Second-Tier Cities Make an Important Contribution to
Competitiveness
The essential picture is that—with the crucial exception of Germany—capital cities dom-
inate the European urban system in terms of population, employment and output. The gap
between capital and second-tier cities is large and in virtually all the former socialist states
of Eastern Europe, it is growing. The total GDP of capital cities in 2007 was greater than
their leading second-tier cities in all but two countries, Germany and Italy (Figure 1). In 19
countries the total GDP of the capital was more than twice that of the largest non-capital
city and was as much as 8 times greater in 4 states—UK, France, Hungary and Latvia.
Nevertheless our evidence shows that all second-tier cities made a contribution—and
some a significant one—to economic growth in Europe between 2000 and 2007, even if
many were overshadowed by capital cities to different degrees in different parts of
Europe. The size of the gap between capitals and secondaries varies and in some cases
is declining.
   Structurally, capitals dominate their national economies. But change is also impor-
tant. And many second-tier cities improved their position in the boom years 2000 –
2007. In 16 of the 26 countries, 1 or more second-tier cities had annual GDP
growth higher than their capitals. In Austria and Germany, all second-tier cities outper-
formed their capitals. The relatively strong growth rates in a number of capitals and
second-tier cities in Eastern Europe, as their economies integrated into the European
economy, also stand out. Indeed, the highest growth rates over this period were
found there (Figure 2).

3.4. Second-Tier City Growth During the Boom—Regionally Differentiated
Although many second-tier cities performed well during the boom years when they had
national government support and investment, there were large regional disparities
(Map 1). The prosperous city-regions in the North, Central and West of Europe contrast
with the less prosperous city-regions of the Central East, East and South East. Together,
the North, Central and West groupings housed over four fifths of the leading city-
regions. By contrast only 3 of the 27 city-regions in the former socialist Unitary states
of Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia were leading, 3 were inter-
mediate and the great majority were lagging. There were some shifts during the period.
The lagging city-regions of East and South East Europe, and to a lesser extent, of
Central East Europe had a rapid burst of growth in the eight-year period. Those in
1060   M. Parkinson, R. Meegan & J. Karecha




                             Figure 1. Total GDP in PPS, 2007.
                               Source: Parkinson et al. (2012).


transition to capitalist economies and integrating into the European economy had average
growth rates 6 and 7 times those of the established West and North.


3.5. The Crisis Threatens to Undermine Achievements of Second-Tier Cities
But the recession has had a major impact on many of them—in particular those which
flourished during the boom decade (Map 2). More than 75% of the cities experienced
GDP falls 2008 – 2010. Capitals performed far better than second-tier cities during the
crisis. The better-performing places were in Eastern Europe and in Poland in particular.
The fastest growing 19 places—12 Polish—were all in Eastern Europe. The Baltics
have been heavily hit. Major Western European countries have all been hit. In Germany
only Berlin grew. In all other German cities GDP declined. In the UK all 14 cities declined.
In Italy all 12 cities declined. In Spain 8 of 9 declined.
                                              City Size and Economic Performance          1061




 Figure 2. Second-tier cities’ contribution increasing: total GDP average annual real % change
                                           2000 –2007.
                                         Source: Eurostat.



4. So What Are the Policy Messages for Governments About Second-Tier Cities?
4.1. Decentralization of Powers and Resources—to Match Devolved Responsibilities—
Is Crucial
Levels of centralization matter. But decentralization of responsibilities to cities only works
if responsibilities are matched by corresponding powers and resources. Cities perform
better in those countries which are less centralized and economically concentrated and
where cities have greater powers, resources and responsibilities. Many policy-makers
and researchers believe that, given the impact of deconcentrating resources and decentra-
lizing powers on second-tier cities, national policies should give them more powers,
responsibilities and resources. A policy of economic place making has benefitted many
cities. It underlines the potential for wider implementation in national and European pol-
icies in the future.
1062   M. Parkinson, R. Meegan & J. Karecha




                Map 1. European city-regions’ economic growth, 2000–2008.
                             Source: Parkinson et al. (2014).

4.2. The Limits of Capital Cities
Our study also identified a series of concerns about the dominance of capital cities.
One theme is the costs and negative externalities of agglomeration. The second theme
is that all urban areas have potential which national policy should encourage, rather
                                           City Size and Economic Performance     1063




                  Map 2. European city-regions in recession, 2008–2010.
                            Source: Parkinson et al. (2014).

than concentrating upon a limited number of already successful places. Agglomeration
does obviously produce economic benefits. OECD research has shown that in some
countries, the largest single metropolitan area produces between one-third and one-half
of national GDP. However, the economic benefits of agglomeration are not limitless.
1064   M. Parkinson, R. Meegan & J. Karecha

Cities can reach a point where external diseconomies make them less competitive because
of negative externalities caused by unregulated urban growth and diminishing marginal
returns. Beyond a certain point, congestion, land scarcity, sprawl, marginalized human
capital and infrastructure deterioration contribute to an area’s decline. And investors
and developers may start to avoid them and move elsewhere. Given such potential
risks, focusing on second-tier cities would create greater economic growth and greater effi-
ciency by reducing diseconomies of scale.

4.3. Capital Cities Matter—but Not at the Expense of Everywhere Else
Capital cities matter, are crucially important to their national economies and must be able
to compete in a global market. But the risk is that they dominate the rest of the urban
system so the national economy becomes spatially and structurally unbalanced. Some-
times second-tier cities do benefit from national policy. But often this happens in implicit
rather than explicit ways. Most states do not have a policy for second-tier cities, which
means their collective interests are overlooked. The policy choice is not between favouring
growing areas as opposed to the regeneration of declining areas. It is between putting the
national eggs into a smaller or larger number of baskets. Our study suggests that national
governments which concentrate attention and resources on their capital cities risk increas-
ing uneven development with whole regions and cities missing out on chances to enter the
new economy. Second-tier cities, although less able to act on the global stage, can still
generate important dynamism for regions outside the capital and contribute to overall
national growth. In many cases they punch beyond their weight. They cater for variations
within nation states and contribute to territorial cohesion. They contain higher order ser-
vices and offer companies better access to them than if they were all concentrated in the
capital city. They can achieve many of the agglomeration effects of capitals, provided they
have the right infrastructure, facilities, capacity and powers. They can lift the performance
of their regions, reduce inter-regional inequalities and promote social cohesion.

4.4. Win– Win Not Zero Sum
So the message is clear. Strong capitals matter to nation states’ global positioning and
competitiveness. However, strong second-tier cities also matter. Both capital and
second-tier cities must be supported in future. It is a win– win, not a zero sum relationship.
A key policy issue is how to encourage second-tier cities to absorb some of their capital
city’s growth as capitals reach the limits of their capacity to accommodate that growth and
the costs begin to outweigh the benefits. Government should help second-tier cities so they
can emerge from the current recession with more “investment ready” places to maximize
future national economic performance.

4.5. Will the Market Deliver?
We argue that second-tier cities could contribute more if they were given greater support
and investment. Some argue there is no need for government intervention to address
regional and urban imbalances. They believe the market itself will self-regulate and
lead to increased investment in second-tier cities as the costs and price of growth in the
capital become more obvious and the opportunities in second-tier cities become equally
                                              City Size and Economic Performance        1065

obvious. But our analysis, in keeping with much regional economic analyses, does not
support that view. The logic of over-investment in the capitals and under-investment in
second-tier cities is simply too strong in too many countries. As the German experience
demonstrates, it requires public intervention and good governance.


4.6. Good Governance—Shared Responsibilities and Clarity of Roles
The key governance issue is not simply the division of powers and resources. It is also the
extent to which responsibilities are shared and roles are transparent or confused. For
example, urban policies tend to be vertically integrated in German cities because key func-
tions are shared, or because the Federal Government funds urban and regional partnership
experiments or because they are the subject of extensive negotiations between federal,
state and city governments. Cities’ financial capacity, in particular the extent to which
they rely upon national grant, transfers and financial equalization or can raise their own
revenue, also affects national policy impacts. In some cases, centralization of power is
exacerbated by the lack of strong, democratically elected regional government and frag-
mented metropolitan governance. In other cases, cities in decentralized states were in vir-
tually the same position as those in centralized unitary states because decentralization of
responsibilities has not been matched by the decentralization of financial resources.


4.7. Good Governance—Local Discretion, Shared Values, Flexibility and Trust
National policies work best where there is collective understanding at different govern-
ment levels of how different interventions affect cities and the right levers to pull to maxi-
mize performance. National policies are most effective where there is scope to shape them
to local circumstances. This requires multi-level governance as well as human and fiscal
capacity and autonomy at the city level. Also the consistency, transparency and reliability
of national policy are critically important because urban economic development is a long-
term business. Finally, the most robust policy systems are underpinned by a set of shared
principles and values. These include: focussing upon business and community needs;
understanding and responding to future urban challenges; reconciling strategic and local
perspectives; trust, reciprocity and mutual respect.


4.8. Territorial Economic Governance at Scale
Few countries or cities have successfully addressed the key territorial challenge of devel-
oping economic governance at scale so that all the key actors and institutions across a
functional economic area can maximize their assets to achieve integrated, place-based
economic strategies. Too many cities are still attempting to use nineteenth century local
boundaries and twentieth century forms of government to shape and develop a twenty-
first century global economy. Successful city-regions need governance to be upscaled to
the functional economic level. At the moment too often, they are too many, too small
and not fit for purpose. European, national and regional governments should incentivize
and encourage voluntary collaboration but also strengthen formal territorial governance
at the city region level.
1066   M. Parkinson, R. Meegan & J. Karecha

4.9. Greater Transparency about Territorial Investment Strategies. Greater Focus on
Second-Tier Cities
Urban policy across Europe is very uneven. There has been a shift in the orientation of
explicit urban policies and greater emphasis on boosting urban competitiveness. But the
national and regional funds allocated for them are dwarfed by mainstream spending pro-
grammes. Few states consider the effects of mainstream programmes and spending on the
performance of second-tier cities, since most governments are organized on functional
rather than territorial lines. Also, very few states have introduced conscious policies to
promote their leading second-tier cities. Governments should be more transparent about
their criteria for territorial investment and their impacts upon different city-regions. Gov-
ernments should monitor and publicize the territorial impacts of their expenditure pro-
grammes. In particular, Governments should ensure that all mainstream programmes, as
well as special urban programmes are focussed on second-tier cities and not concentrated
upon the capitals. National government policies, for example, for innovation, research and
development, education and skills, transport and connectivity, and infrastructure invest-
ment have a major impact upon the relative performance of capital and second-tier
cities. It is crucial they are used strategically to avoid over concentration upon, and over-
heating of, the capital as well as to avoid the limiting of scarce resources to second-tier
cities. These principles will become more significant in a period of austerity.


4.10. So When Should National Governments Invest in Second-Tier Cities?
The number of high-performing second-tier cities a country can sustain will vary accord-
ing to both the country’s size and level of economic development. For example, in smaller
countries there will be less scope for a large number of cities to complement the capital.
Equally in the developing economies of the east, at present the capital city is the most sig-
nificant driver of the national economy. In both cases, capital cities might remain the initial
focus for investment because they are most likely to have the capacity and critical mass to
succeed. Nevertheless, countries must have strategies for developing second-tier cities, to
spread economic benefits and help them become the economic motors of their wider
regions. Governments should encourage as many successful second-tier cities as the popu-
lation and pattern of economic growth and development permit.
   So for policy-makers at all government levels the message is clear. Strong capitals
matter to nation states’ global positioning and competitiveness. However, strong
second-tier cities also matter. Both capital and second-tier cities must be supported in
future. It is a win – win, not a zero sum relationship. A key policy issue is how to encourage
second-tier cities to absorb some of their capital cities’ growth as capitals reach the limits
of their capacity to accommodate that growth, and the costs begin to outweigh the benefits.
Governments at all levels should help second-tier cities so they can emerge from the
current recession with more “investment ready” places to maximize future national econ-
omic performance. The individual circumstances of countries, regions and city-regions
will vary and so will policy responses. However, some general principles to guide
future territorial investment have become clear. Specifically, governments should invest
more in second-tier cities when: (i) the gap with capitals is large and growing; (ii) the
business infrastructure of second-tier cities is weak because of national underinvestment;
and (iii) there is clear evidence about the negative externalities of capital city growth.
                                                         City Size and Economic Performance                  1067

4.11. Policy Messages for Europe
A final policy message is for the European Commission. City-regions are crucial to the
delivery of its strategic goals identified in EU2020 (European Commission, 2010). It
must take city-regions—and their leadership—more seriously in future. Commission
policy for cities has varied in recent years and the significance of the economic place-
making agenda has fluctuated. The issues have slipped down the Commission’s agenda
in recent years and should be reasserted. The Commission needs to exercise leadership
and provide clarity and resources in this field. It should do more to ensure that the econ-
omic potential of second-tier cities is clearly recognized in its strategies. The territorial
impact of all Commission policies, not just those of DG Regio should be made more expli-
cit. The sectoral policies of the Commission should be better integrated. But the key chal-
lenge is to ensure that not only the explicit targeted resources but all mainstream
Commission funding impacts on second-tier cities in a more coherent way than it currently
does. In a period of austerity, it is crucial that the Commission commits to the importance
of those cities. First it should not retreat to a policy of concentrating only on small socially
deprived areas but focus more widely upon economic place making. Second it must not
focus only on a limited number of already successful places but should make the wider
longer term investments that will bring longer term economic prosperity to more places,
more countries and hence to Europe.


References
Amin, A. & Thrift, N. (1995) Globalization institutional thickness and the local economy, in: P. Healey, S. Cameron,
     S. Davoudi, S. Graham & A. Madanipour (Eds) Managing Cities: The New Urban Context, pp. 91–108
     (Chichester: Wiley).
Ascani, A., Crescenzi, R. & Iammarino, S. (2012) Regional Economic Development: A Review, SEARCH
     Working Paper 1/03 (London: Department of Geography and Environment London School of Economics).
     Available at http://www.ub.edu/searchproject/wp-content/uploads/2012/02/WP-1.3.pdf (accessed 26 July
     2013).
Barca, F. (2009) An Agenda for a Reformed Cohesion Policy: A Place Based Approach to Meeting European
     Union Challenges and Expectations (Brussels: DG Regio). Available at http://ec.europa. eu/regional_
     policy/archive/policy/future/pdf/report_barca_v0306.pdf (accessed 26 July 2013).
Barca, F. & McCann, P. (2010) The place-based approach: A response to Mr Gill. Available at http://www.voxeu.
     org/article/regional-development-policies-place-based-or-people-centred (accessed 26 July 2013).
Barca, F., McCann, P. & Rodrı́guez-Pose, A. (2012) The case for regional development intervention: Place-based
     versus place-neutral approaches, Journal of Regional Science, 52(1), pp. 134 –152.
Brenner, N. & Keil, R. (Eds) (2006) The Global Cities Reader (Abingdon: Routledge).
Crescenzi, R. & Rodrı́guez-Pose, A. (2011) Reconciling top-down and bottom-up development policies, Environ-
     ment and Planning A, 43(4), pp. 773–780.
Duranton, G. & Puga, D. (2004) Micro-foundations of urban agglomeration economies, in: V. Henderson & J.-F.
     Thisse (Eds) Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Vol. 4, pp. 2063– 2117 (Amsterdam: North-
     Holland).
European Commission (2010b) EU2020 (Brussels: European Commission).
Fujita, M., Krugman, P. & Venables, A. (1999) The Spatial Economy (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Garcilazo, J. E., Martins, J. O. & Tompson, W. (2010) Why Policies may need to be place-based in order to be
     people-centred. Available at http://www.voxeu.org/index.php?q¼node/5827 (accessed 26 July 2013).
Grabher, G. (Ed) (1993) The Embedded Firm: On the Socio-Economics of Industrial Networks (London: Routle-
     dge).
Henderson, J. V. (2010) Cities and development, Journal of Regional Science, 50(1), pp. 515– 540.
Hildreth, P. & Bailey, D. (2013) The economics behind localism in England, Cambridge Journal of Regions
     Economy and Society, 6(2), pp. 2233– 2249.
1068     M. Parkinson, R. Meegan & J. Karecha

Kitson, M., Martin, R. & Tyler, P. (2004) Regional competiveness: An elusive yet key concept, Regional Studies,
     38(9), pp. 9991– 999.
Krugman, P. (1990) Rethinking International Trade (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Krugman, P. (1991) Geography and Trade (Leuven: Leuven University Press).
Krugman, P. (1993) On the relationship between trade theory and location theory, Review of International Econ-
     omics, 1(2), pp. 110– 122.
Markusen, A., Lee, Yong-Sook & DiGiovanni, S. (1999) Second Tier Cities: Rapid Growth Beyond the Metro-
     polis (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press).
Maskell, P. (2002) Social competitiveness innovation and competitiveness, in: S. Barron, J. Field & T. Schuller
     (Eds) Social Capital: Critical Perspectives, 111 –123 (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
McCann, P. & Ortega-Argilés, R. (2011) Smart Specialisation Regional Growth and Applications to EU Cohe-
     sion Policy, Economic Geography Working Paper 2011, Faculty of Social Sciences, University of Gronin-
     gen. Available at http://www.rug.nl/staff/p.mccan/McCannSmartSpecialisationAndEUCohesionPolicy
     (accessed 26 July 2013).
McCann, P. & Rodrı́guez-Pose, A. (2011) Why and when development policy should be place-based, in: OECD
     (Ed) OECD Regional Outlook 2011: Building Resilient Regions for Stronger Economies, 203– 213 (Paris:
     OECD).
OECD (2006) Competitive Cities in the Global Economy March (Paris: OECD).
OECD (2012a) Promoting Growth in All Regions: Lessons from Across the OECD, March (Paris: OECD Policy
     Brief).
OECD (2012b) Promoting Growth in All Types of Regions (Paris: OECD).
Parkinson, M., Meegan, R., Karecha, J., Evans, R., Jones, G., Tosics, I., Gertheis, A., Tönko, A., Hegedüs, J.,
     Illés, I., Sotarauta, M., Ruokolainen, O., Lefèvre, C. & Hall, P. (2012) Second Tier Cities and Territorial
     Development in Europe: Performance Policies and Prospects Executive Summary and Final Report (Lux-
     embourg: ESPON). Available at www.espon.eu (accessed 1 April 2014).
Parkinson, M. & Meegan, R. (2013) Economic place making: policy messages for European cities, Policy Studies,
     34(3), pp. 377–400.
Parkinson, M., Meegan, R. & Karecha, J. (2014) UK city-regions in growth and recession: How are they perform-
     ing at home and abroad? ESRC Secondary Data Analysis Initiative Project Working Paper, Liverpool, Euro-
     pean Institute for Urban Affairs, Liverpool John Moores University.
Piore, M. & Sabel, C. (1984) The Second Industrial Divide: Possibilities for Prosperity (New York: Basic Books).
Sassen, S. (2001) The Global City: New York London Tokyo, 2nd ed. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press).
Sassen, S. (2012) Cities in a World Economy, 4th ed. (Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press).
Scott, A. J. (1988) New Industrial Spaces (London: Pion).
Storper, M. & Scott, A. J. (1988) The geographical foundations and social regulation of flexible production com-
     plexes, in: J. Wolch & M. Dear (Eds) The Power of Geography, 19– 40 (Boston, MA: Allen & Unwin).
World Bank. (2009) World Development Report 2009: Reshaping Economic Geography (Washington, DC:
     World Bank).
Copyright of European Planning Studies is the property of Routledge and its content may not
be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's
express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for
individual use.
