[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: journal/B13-meijers-burger-2010-spatial-structure-and-productivity-in-us-metropolitan-areas-10.1068-a42151.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Title:           a42151 1383..1402
Creator:         3B2 Total Publishing 6.05d/W
Producer:        Acrobat Distiller 3.01 for Windows
CreationDate:    Sun Jun 20 21:18:56 2010 WIB
ModDate:         Mon Jun 21 18:13:46 2010 WIB
Custom Metadata: no
Metadata Stream: yes
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            none
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           21
Encrypted:       yes (print:yes copy:yes change:no addNotes:yes algorithm:RC4)
Page size:       420.8 x 686 pts
Page rot:        0
File size:       365323 bytes
Optimized:       yes
PDF version:     1.4
[Extracted Text]
Environment and Planning A 2010, volume 42, pages 1383 ^ 1402


doi:10.1068/a42151


Spatial structure and productivity in US metropolitan areas



Evert J Meijers
Delft University of Technology, OTB Research Institute for the Built Environment, PO Box 5030,
2600 GA Delft, The Netherlands; e-mail: e.j.meijers@tudelft.nl
Martijn J Burger
Department of Applied Economics and ERIM, Erasmus University Rotterdam, PO Box 1738,
3000 DR Rotterdam, The Netherlands; e-mail: mburger@ese.eur.nl
Received 24 April 2009; in revised form 4 December 2009



Abstract. Recent concepts such as `megaregions' and `polycentric urban regions' emphasize that
external economies are not confined to a single urban core, but are shared among a collection of
nearby and linked cities. However, empirical analyses of agglomeration and agglomeration external-
ities have so far neglected the multicentric spatial organization of agglomeration and the possibility of
the `sharing' or `borrowing' of size between cities. The authors take up this empirical challenge by
analyzing how different spatial structures, in particular the monocentricity ^ polycentricity dimension,
affect the economic performance of US metropolitan areas. Ordinary least squares and two-stage
least-squares models explaining labor productivity show that spatial structure matters: polycentricity
is associated with higher labor productivity. This appears to justify suggestions that, compared with
more monocentric metropolitan areas, agglomeration diseconomies remain relatively limited in
the more polycentric metropolitan areas, whereas agglomeration externalities are to some extent
shared among the cities in such an area. However, it was also found that a network of geographically
proximate smaller cities cannot substitute for the urbanization externalities of a single large city.


1 Introduction
Slowly but steadily, the image of the city has changed dramatically over the last century
and a half. The industrial image of a cityöas being composed of an urban core and a
rural hinterlandöhas become increasingly obsolete. Advances in transport infrastruc-
ture and rising levels of car ownership have fuelled a process of decentralization and
suburbanization, initially of people, but later followed by jobs (Boarnet, 1994).
However, this trend does not stop with the establishment of new centers in the city
or at its edges. We are also witnessing the `fusion' of formerly relatively independent
and distinct cities into wider metropolitan areas. Nowadays, what is `urban' increas-
ingly spreads out over a wider region, requiring us to think of the city as a regional
phenomenon (Scott, 1988; Storper, 1997). This is reflected in the revival of the debate
on city-regions (Parr, 2005) and in the conceptualization of regionalized urban
entities (Florida et al, 2008; Hall and Pain, 2006; Kloosterman and Musterd, 2001).
In spatial terms, the structure of such regions can be characterised as a series of
towns ``physically separate but functionally networked, clustered around one or more
larger cities'' (Hall and Pain, 2006, page 3), or ``integrated sets of cities and their
surrounding suburban hinterlands'' (Florida et al, 2008, page 459). Therefore, the
emerging spatial form of postindustrial urban regions is quintessentially polycentric
(Hall, 2000; Kloosterman and Musterd, 2001; Phelps and Ozawa, 2003).
    Essential to this debate on such regionalized urban entities is the underlying idea
that external economies are not confined to a well-defined single urban core but,
instead, are shared among a group of functionally linked settlements (Phelps and
Ozawa, 2003; Sassen, 2007). The basic idea of polycentricity is that multiple centers
or cities, and hence multiple sources of agglomeration economies, are colocated and
1384                                                              E J Meijers, M J Burger




also interact, given the widening geographical scale of economic and social processes
(van Oort et al, 2010). Such `regionalization' of urbanization externalities has been con-
ceptualized and described by several scholars (Coe and Townsend, 1998; Richardson,
1995), deploying terms such as `urban network externalities' (Capello, 2000), `spatial
externality fields' (Phelps et al, 2001), or `regional externalities' (Parr, 2002). Such
concepts build on the concept of `borrowed size', coined by Alonso (1973), who
used it to explain why smaller cities that are part of a megalopitan urban complex
had much higher incomes than self-contained cities of similar size. According to Phelps
and Ozawa,
   ``the idea of borrowed size suggests that today's examples of megalopitan agglomera-
     tion are based predominantly on some combination of pecuniary and technological
     externalities open to service industries across a group of settlements, rather than
     the technological externalities available at the localised scale of discrete towns or
     cities'' (2003, page 594).
     When external economies are increasingly conceptualized in relational terms
(Burger et al, 2009; Gordon and McCann, 2000; Johansson and Quigley, 2004;
Phelps and Ozawa, 2003), it would make sense to study agglomeration externalities
at the scale of the regional urban system rather than the single city, as interactions
with nearby cities may also influence the presence of agglomeration externalities.
However, such research seems nonexistent. It appears that empirical analysis of
economic agglomeration does not correspond to the changes in the geographical
scale at which agglomeration manifests itself (Burger et al, 2010; Phelps and Ozawa,
2003). In analysis, the shape of the urban system is most often simply taken for
granted (Kloosterman and Musterd, 2001; Scott, 2000). In equilibrium approaches,
the economic organization of space is not a concern (see Corpataux and Crevoisier,
2007).
     The principal objective of this paper is to provide some first steps to overcome the
empirical deficit which characterize the current debate about the sharing of agglomer-
ation externalities between a collection of more or less proximally located cities. Do
cities actually borrow size from each other? Can a collection of nearby cities provide a
substitute for the urbanization externalities of a single larger city? These key questions
are at the heart of the worldwide policy debates on the geographical scale of agglom-
eration, be it megaregions in the USA or Asia, or the somewhat smalleröin spatial
terms öpolycentric urban regions that have become such a popular planning concept
in Europe (see Meijers, 2005).
     The approach developed in this paper to answer the question of whether cities
borrow, or share, size is to include the spatial structure of metropolitan areas into
empirical analysis of agglomeration externalities. Building on previous work by Anas
et al (1998) and Lee and Gordon (2007), we do not limit ourselves to the monocentricity ^
polycentricity dimension, but also include a centralization ^ dispersion dimension.
Labor productivity is used as a proxy for metropolitan performance. We extend existing
production functions [notably those of Ciccone and Hall (1996)], with spatial variables
other than the commonly used indicators such as size or average density.
     The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We synthesize the literature
discussing the spatial structure of metropolitan areas in relation to their performance
in section 2, which results in three testable assumptions. In section 3 we present our
measurement of the spatial structure of metropolitan areas; in section 4 we give the
model specification and detail other data used. In section 5 we present the estimation
results, and in section 6 conclude and discuss the implications of our findings.
Spatial structure and productivity in US metropolitan areas                            1385




2 Urbanization, spatial structure, and metropolitan performance
Spatial structure has attracted increasing interest from urban geographers and planners
as it is believed to affect the economic performance, environmental sustainability, and
social well-being of places and their inhabitants. Clear examples are the `new urbanism'
and `smart growth' movements in urban planning circles in the USA. Although in
regional science and urban economics there is a large empirical literature which links
city characteristics to urban performance, empirical work on agglomeration often does
not go beyond including average density or city size (`urbanization externalities')
as a spatially relevant factor. However, neither density nor size reveals much about a
region's spatial organization.
    Indicators of the spatial organization of metropolitan areas need to address two
questions (Anas et al, 1998). First, how is the urban population spread over urban centers?
Second, to what extent is the metropolitan population located in urban centers or
dispersed? The first question refers to a monocentric ^ polycentric dimension, while the
second question refers to a centralization ^ dispersion dimension. Below, we address
the relationship of size, monocentricity ^ polycentricity, and centralization ^ dispersion,
respectively, with metropolitan performance, which results in three testable hypotheses.
2.1 Size and urbanization externalities
A large strand of empirical research in regional science and urban economics focuses
on the benefits stemming from the size or density of the urban economy. As a general
rule, these urbanization externalities can be regarded as external economies passed to
firms as a result of savings from the large-scale operation of the city as a whole. These
benefits are uncontrollable and unregulable for a single firm and, above all, immobile
or spatially constrained (van Oort, 2004). Following Isard (1956), it is the availability of
a large and multifunctional labor pool and the presence of a good infrastructure and
public facilities in dense economic areas that are the sources of urbanization external-
ities. Relatively more urbanized areas are also more likely to accommodate universities,
R&D laboratories, trade associations, and other knowledge-generating institutions.
Moreover, the often diverse industry mix in an economically dense area increases the
odds of interaction, generation, replication, modification, and recombination of ideas
and applications across different sectors (van Oort, 2004), and protects a region from
volatile demand (Frenken et al, 2007). In addition, the presence of a large internal
market offers a larger degree of stability and lower transport costs (Siegel et al, 1995).
However, a high degree of urbanization may also result in a dispersion of economic
activities due to pollution, crime, or high land and housing prices. In this respect, one
can speak of `urbanization diseconomies', which are assumed to be negatively related
to metropolitan performance. We expect to confirm the strong positive relation
between size and metropolitan performance, but our main interest lies with the mono-
centricity ^ polycentricity and centralization ^ dispersion dimensions of urban spatial
structure.
2.2 Monocentricity and polycentricity
Whereas metropolitan size is linked to external economies of scale, monocentricity or
polycentricity, and centralization or dispersion, can be linked to external economies
of structure. In the current debate on metropolitan spatial structure, the influence of
monocentricity or its opposite, polycentricity, on the performance of metropolitan
areas remains unclear due to a lack of empirical research, although this evidence is
urgently needed (Cheshire, 2006; Kloosterman and Musterd, 2001; Lambooy, 1998;
Meijers, 2008a; Parr, 2004; 2008; Turok and Bailey, 2004).
    At the spatial scale of the metropolitan area, Lee and Gordon (2007) did not find
that a polycentric or monocentric structure, measured by the subcenters' share of all
1386                                                                 E J Meijers, M J Burger




center employment, affects metropolitan population or employment growth. Still, it is
generally brought forward that the advantage of polycentricity at the local level is that
it comes with a lack of agglomeration disadvantages (see Bertaud, 2004; Fujita et al,
1997; Goffette-Nagot and Schmitt, 1999) such as fierce competition for land and
workers, congestion, and pollution exposure.
     Agglomeration disadvantages appear to be confined largely to the scale of individ-
ual cities within the metropolitan area (Parr, 2002), and evidence suggests that smaller
cities have a greater endogenous capacity to keep these social, economic, and environ-
mental costs under control (Capello and Camagni, 2000). When, at the same time,
the idea holds that agglomeration advantages are increasingly associated with a more
regionalized spatial structure (Capello and Camagni, 2000; Parr, 2002; Sassen, 2007)
as networks may substitute for agglomeration (Johansson and Quigley, 2004), then
polycentricity will become an increasingly strong asset of metropolitan areas. So far,
however, it remains untested whether a polycentric spatial structure in metropolitan
areas leads to successful economic development (Lambooy, 1998; Parr, 2004; 2008).
Building on the idea that agglomeration advantages have `regionalized' to a consid-
erable extent, whereas disadvantages remain local issues, we hypothesize in this paper
that a more polycentric urban structure has a direct and positive effect on metropolitan
performance, as it may provide a better balance between agglomeration advantages
and agglomeration disadvantages.
2.2.1 Extent of regionalization of urbanization externalities
Despite the theoretical consensus regarding the `regionalization' of urban externalities,
the extent to which such a `regionalization' may take place in a polycentric spatial
structure is much questioned. According to Bailey and Turok (2001), the idea that the
integration of separate cities results in agglomeration advantages comparable to those
enjoyed by similar-sized monocentric cities is `rather simplistic'. Parr (2004; 2008)
points in this respect to the need for longer travel flows, longer commodity flows,
and less convenient flows of information in polycentric urban regions. Moreover, it
should be noted that ``some of the advantages of urban size stem from the nature of the
metropolitan environment, and are related to such factors as density, proximity, face-
to-face contact, informal structures, unplanned interaction, etc'' (Parr, 2004, page 236),
and consequently hold less for polycentric urban regions. This is confirmed by a recent
study (Meijers, 2008a) which showed that polycentric regions in the Netherlands had
significantly fewer cultural, leisure, and sports amenities than did monocentric regions
in which the urban population is concentrated in a single city. In this paper we test
the hypothesis that polycentricity diminishes the effect of urbanization on labor
productivity at the regional metropolitan scale.
2.3 Centralization and dispersion
A `dispersed spatial structure' refers to the situation in which a large part of the
population is not living in centers but is spread out across the territory in a non-
concentrated pattern. It is not necessarily similar to urban sprawl, as this is often equated
with low-density residential development, whereas dispersion concerns the issue of
whether the development is taking place in centers or not, leaving aside the question
of density. Whether or not dispersion negatively influences urban performance is an
unsolved issue and, as far as it corresponds to urban sprawl, even controversial. Accord-
ing to a 2000 Costs of Sprawl report (Transportation Research Board, 2002), dispersed
low-density development consumes more land and infrastructure, is associated with
fewer fiscal impacts, whilst increasing housing costs, personal travel costs, and auto-
mobile dependence. Critics claim that spread-out, dispersed development fulfills a
widespread need for safe neighborhoods, appreciating housing values, and unrestricted
Spatial structure and productivity in US metropolitan areas                            1387




use of automobiles. Glaeser and Kahn (2004) stress the association of sprawl with
significant improvements in quality of life. According to the 2000 Costs of Sprawl study
(Transportation Research Board, 2002), the alternative is a form of centralization in
which development is directed to locations where it is more efficient to provide public
services. This is referred to as `smart growth'. In this study we test the hypothesis that
metropolitan areas which have a higher proportion of the population living in urban
places and, hence, less dispersion, perform better in terms of labor productivity.

3 Quantifying metropolitan spatial structure
A prerequisite for testing the idea of whether urbanization economies are dependent on
spatial structure is to quantify this regional spatial structure. In addition to size, we
distinguish two dimensions which affect spatial concentration. Here we discuss their
exact measurement. The centralization ^ dispersion dimension refers to the extent to
which population and employment is centralized in cities or dispersed over smaller
nonurban places in a noncentralized pattern. The monocentricity ^ polycentricity
dimension reflects the extent to which urban population and employment is con-
centrated in one city or spread over multiple cities in the wider metropolitan area
(see figure 1). These two dimensions are quite similar to the two types of spatial
concentration at the city level discerned by Anas et al (1998) in their classic essay on
the urban spatial structure of cities (see also Lee and Gordon, 2007), although in terms
of measurement we adopt them to the larger metropolitan area scale.

                        Centralized




Monocentric                                    Polycentric




                        Dispersed

              Wider metropolitan
              region (CSA/MSA)        Place

Figure 1. Dimensions of regional urban form.

3.1 Monocentricity versus polycentricity
In the literature one finds different interpretations of what makes a metropolitan area
polycentric (Meijers, 2008b). Broadly speaking, there is an approach that defines poly-
centricity on the basis of urban morphology (see Kloosterman and Musterd, 2001; Parr,
2004), while another approach adds relational aspects, in the sense that a metropolitan
area can be considered polycentric only when the cities are strongly functionally linked,
which is sometimes referred to as `relational polycentricity' or `functional polycentricity'
(see, for instance, de Goei et al, 2009; Green, 2007; Hall and Pain, 2006). Here, we
adhere to the first and least restrictive vision, thus studying the monocentricity ^
polycentricity dimension from a morphological perspective. It is important to note
that polycentricity is not so much about the presence of multiple cities in a metropol-
itan area, as about the balance in the size distribution of these cities. The more even
this balance, and hence the less strong the hierarchy, the more polycentric the area
(Kloosterman and Lambregts, 2001; Meijers, 2005; Parr, 2004).
1388                                                                     E J Meijers, M J Burger




    The rank ^ size distribution of the regional urban system provides information on
this hierarchy and is therefore a useful indication of the extent of monocentricity or
polycentricity (Nordregio et al, 2004; Parr, 2004). Figure 2 presents the four largest
incorporated places in the US metropolitan areas and also the regression slope that
best fits the distribution of their sizes. The flatter this slope, the more polycentric
the metropolitan area; conversely, the steeper this slope, the more monocentric the
metropolitan area. In this example, San Antonio, TX, is obviously monocentric,
whereas San Jose ^ San Francisco ^ Oakland, CA, is a clear example of a polycentric
metropolitan area.
    In this study we calculated the slope of the regression line of the rank ^ size
distribution of incorporated places (cities) in each US metropolitan area.(1) Following
a previously described method (Meijers, 2008b), we did this for different numbers of
incorporated places (2, 3, and 4) per metropolitan area and then calculated the average
of these three scores. The slopes found were normally distributed, meaning that the



               6.0



               5.5

log10 (size)

               5.0



               4.5




               6.0



               5.5

log10 (size)
               5.0



               4.5



                     0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3      0.4    0.5   0.6   0.7
                                        log10 (rank)

Figure 2. Rank ^ size distributions as measures of (a) monocentricity and (b) polycentricity.
(1) Considering only incorporated places of at least 5000 inhabitants in 2006. In cases where the

second-largest incorporated place in the metropolitan region did not meet this threshold, we used
its actual size in order to be able to calculate a slope.
Spatial structure and productivity in US metropolitan areas                                   1389




majority of metropolitan areas in the USA cannot be considered very monocentric nor
very polycentric, but are somewhere in between these extremes on the scale. It appears
that only the most polycentric metropolitan areas can be considered polycentric urban
regions in the way they are usually defined.(2) Below, we refer to the position of a
metropolitan area on this scale ranging from monocentric to polycentric as its `degree
of polycentricity', simply because higher values mean that it is more polycentric.
Otherwise, we could have equally chosen to term it the `degree of monocentricity'.
     The rank ^ size distribution does not provide information on the spread of cities
over the metropolitan territory, but polycentricity is also about spatially distinct
cities (Kloosterman and Lambregts, 2001; Parr, 2004). Therefore, we need to filter
out regions which score `polycentric' in terms of the rank ^ size distribution, but in
which the cities are part of the same contiguous built-up area. In this last case, the
term `polycentric conurbation' is more appropriate. If the two largest cities of a metro-
politan area which scored as polycentric belong to the same `urban area', which is
delineated by the US Census Bureau to encompass densely settled territory, we labelled
these `polycentric conurbations'. We did not include these polycentric conurbations in
the analysis as it could be argued that these metropolitan areas, although scoring as
polycentric, in fact more resemble monocentric areasöthe main difference being the
presence of administrative boundaries dividing the built-up area (see the appendix).
3.2 Centralization versus dispersion
The share of the central city in total metropolitan area population in the USA fell
rapidly from almost 64% in 1930 to 38% in 2000 (Kim, 2007). The question, then, is
that of where the majority of the metropolitan population is located: are they clustered
in other urban centers, or are they dispersed over the metropolitan territory in an
uncentered way? In order to test the hypothesis that less centralization, and thus
more dispersion, limits labor productivity, we scored each case-study area on a
centralization ^ dispersion axis, their position being dependent on the share of the
metropolitan population that was not located in urban centers of at least 25 000
inhabitants in 2006.
3.3 Association of dimensions
Both dimensions are associated in the sense that more polycentric metropolitan areas
tend to be characterized slightly more often by dispersion (see table 1 for a listing of
the most extreme scores on the two dimensions). There are, however, exceptions to the
rule. For instance Midland ^ Odessa, TX, is the most polycentric metropolitan area,
although it is also among the top seven most centralized areas.

4 Model, data, and estimation strategy
4.1 Model
In regional science and urban economics, many studies have investigated the effect of
urbanization externalities using aggregate production functions at the city level.
Although different functional forms of urban production exist, our point of departure
is the models developed by Ciccone and Hall (1996) and Ciccone (2002), who use a
Cobb ^ Douglas production function to assess the effect of agglomeration economies
on localised labor productivity.
    Consider the following production function of a metropolitan economy with pro-
duction factors capital (K), labor (L), human capital (H), materials or intermediate

(2) Following common definitions of such regions (see Kloosterman and Musterd, 2001; Meijers,

2005; Parr, 2004), although for a definite categorization we require more knowledge on the level of
specialization and the level of interaction.
1390                                                                     E J Meijers, M J Burger




Table 1. Most monocentric, polycentric, centralized, and dispersed metropolitan regions in the USA.

Rank Most                    Most                  Most                Most dispersed
     monocentric             polycentric           centralized

1      Lincoln,              Midland ± Odessa,     El Paso, TX         Greenville ± Spartanburg ±
       NE                    TX                                        Anderson, SC
2      Tallahassee,          Santa Barbara ±       Phoenix ± Mesa ±    Portland ± Lewiston ±
       FL                    Santa Maria, CA       Scottsdale, AZ      South Portland, ME
3      Jacksonville,         Johnson City ±        Los Angeles ±       Columbia ± Newberry, SC
       FL                    Kingsport ± Bristol   Long Beach ±
                             (Tri-cities),         Riverside, CA
                             TN ± VA
4      El Paso, TX           Salt Lake City ±      Lincoln, NE         Pittsburgh ± New Castle,
                             Ogden ± Clearfield,                       PA
                             UT
5      San Antonio,          Greenville ±          San Diego ±         Youngstown ± Warren ±
       TX                    Spartanburg ±         Carlsbad ± San      East Liverpool, OH ± PA
                             Anderson, SC          Marcos, CA

inputs (M), and land (N) in which a single good is produced which is a composite of
all the outputs of all producers in that metropolitan area:
    Q ˆ AK k L l H y M m N n ,                                                                  (1)
in which Q is the nominal output. In equation (1), A represents an efficiency parameter
or vector of exogenous influences on the nominal output measuring total factor
productivity. Amongst others, the efficiency parameter A here reflects the urbanization
externalities and metropolitan spatial structure (the degree of polycentricity and of
dispersion). Given constant returns to scale (k ‡ l ‡ y ‡ m ‡ n ˆ 1), equation (1) can
be rewritten as
                k  y  m  n
      Q            K    H      M      N
            ˆ A                             ,                                        (2)
      L            L    L      L       L
in which the output per worker (labor productivity) is a function of the capital ^ labor
ratio, human capital ^ labor ratio (or, alternatively, education per worker), intermediate
inputs ^ labor ratio, and the efficiency parameter A. By taking logarithms on both sides
of equation (2), the multiplicative form can be converted into a linear stochastic form,
to give the following testable equation:
                                                              
          Q                     K             H           M           N
     ln        ˆ y0 ‡ k ln           ‡ y ln       ‡ m ln      ‡ n ln
          L                     L             L           L           L
                       X
                    ‡     yj ‡ 1 ln Xj ‡ rj ‡ e ,                                      (3)
                         j

where equation (3) is augmented with a set of variables X with parameters y, which are
related to metropolitan size and spatial structure and enter the production function
through a higher value of A (Broersma and Oosterhaven, 2009; Fogarty and Garofolo,
1988). Here, this set includes the size of the metropolitan population, the degree of
polycentricity, and the degree of dispersion. Following Ciccone (2002), census region
dummy variables, rj , are included to account for remaining differences in exogenous
total factor productivity, which may moderate the relationship between agglomeration,
Spatial structure and productivity in US metropolitan areas                         1391




spatial structure, and labor productivityösuch as relative differences in climate, price
levels, and levels of technology across metropolitan areas.
4.2 Data and variables
To estimate our production function, data were gathered for metropolitan statistical
areas (MSAs), but in the many cases in which these were part of a wider combined
statistical area (CSA) we used this widest possible definition of US metropolitan
areasöwhich is based largely on commuting behavior (see the appendix). The reason
to focus principally on CSAs comes from the necessity of analyzing the performance of
cities in their wider spatial context, and we wanted to avoid the monocentric perspec-
tive that underlies the MSA definition. For example, it was deemed necessary for this
analysis to take the San Jose ^ San Francisco ^ Oakland CSA as a unit of analysis,
rather than the MSAs that make up this CSA separately. Data were gathered for those
metropolitan areas located in continental USA with a total population over 250 000
inhabitants in 2006.
     Our dependent variable `labor productivity' was measured as the 2006 GDP
in real US dollars of a metropolitan area divided by the total number of jobs in
the included sectors in that area in 2006. As our research underlies a market-based
model, and spatial externalities are most profound in sectors which lack exogenous
endowments, agriculture, fishing, hunting, mining, and public administration were
excluded (see also Bru«lhart and Mathys, 2008). In addition, no figures on self-
employment were available. Data on GDP by metropolitan area and sector were
obtained from the US Department of Commerce's Bureau of Economic Analysis
(BEA). Data on the number of jobs were provided by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics (BLS) of the US Department of Labor, and for individual sectors were
taken from the 2006 American Community Survey. The new BEA estimates enable
a more direct measurement of labor productivity than was previously possible,
when many researchers used indirect proxies such as the mean annual wage, or
household income. Descriptive statistic are provided in table 2. Note that, corre-
sponding with specification (3), all nondummy variables in our empirical analysis
are log-transformed.
Table 2. Descriptive statistics of variables (N ˆ 113).

                                  Mean            Standard    Minimum     Maximum
                                                  deviation

Labor productivity (ln)           11.29           0.197       10.70       11.85
Capital ± labor ratio (ln)        11.93           0.106       11.73       12.31
Land ± labor ratio (ln)           ÿ3.661          0.732       ÿ5.620      ÿ1.671
Education per worker (ln)         ÿ0.621          0.404       ÿ1.650       0.418
Metropolitan size (ln)            13.68           0.998       12.43       16.89
Polycentricity (ln)               ÿ0.573          0.554       ÿ1.636       2.291
Dispersion (ln)                   ÿ0.769          0.425       ÿ2.144      ÿ0.124
New England                        0.027          0.161        0           1
Middle Atlantic                    0.071          0.258        0           1
East North Central                 0.177          0.383        0           1
West North Central                 0.088          0.285        0           1
South Atlantic                     0.159          0.368        0           1
East South Central                 0.177          0.383        0           1
West South Central                 0.071          0.258        0           1
Mountain                           0.088          0.285        0           1
Pacific                            0.142          0.350        0           1
1392                                                              E J Meijers, M J Burger




    With respect to the factor inputs, the `capital ^ labor ratio' within a metropolitan
area was measured by linking the capital ^ labor ratio of broad sectors, as obtained
from the Annual Survey of Manufacturers, to the industrial composition within the
metropolitan area (based on a division into fifteen sectors). Hence, the obtained value
is a weighted average of the capital ^ labor ratio across sectors. Although this oper-
ationalization does not account for regional differences within sectors (eg capital
intensity, level of technology, and subsector specialization), it provides a reasonable
proxy to the capital ^ labor ratio within metropolitan areas. The `land ^ labor ratio' is
defined as the average number of acres per worker within a metropolitan area. The
human capital ^ labor ratio, or average `education per worker', within a metropolitan
area was obtained from the 2006 American Community Survey and measured as the
percentage of the metropolitan population aged 25 years and older with a bachelor's
degree or higher. As our output variable is `gross domestic product' (GDP), which is
the total production minus intermediate inputs, we do not take intermediate goods into
consideration (see also Broersma and Oosterhaven, 2009).
    However, the main variables of interest in our research are the indicators related to
the urbanization externalities and spatial structure. Urbanization externalities are
captured by the variable `metropolitan size', which is measured as the size of the
metropolitan population in 2006. With respect to urban spatial structure, we include
both a metropolitan area's degree of `polycentricity' and its degree of `dispersion' in
our model. Their measurement was discussed in section 3. Finally, dummy variables,
based on the census divisions, are included; these reflect nine broad geographic regions
in the United States (New England, Middle Atlantic, South Atlantic, East North
Central, East South Central, West North Central, West South Central, Mountain, and
Pacific; see also Lee and Gordon, 2007).(3) These dummies attempt to control for some
of the unobserved heterogeneity across metropolitan areasöin particular, differences
in technology and price levels.
4.3 Endogeneity and two-stage least squares estimation (TSLS)
Although equation (3) can be estimated using conventional ordinary least squares
(OLS), this estimation technique does not account for the simultaneity between metro-
politan size and structure and labor productivity. In the model specification, it is
assumed that metropolitan size and spatial structure have an effect on metropolitan
labor productivity. However, the causality of this relationship is far from clear. On
the one hand, agglomeration is often associated with a number of benefits such as
labor-market pooling, accessibility to intermediate goods, knowledge spillovers, and
proximity to consumers, which in turn would augment productivity. On the other
hand, firms may also be attracted to economically dense areas because of the
presence of higher productivity levels (Rosenthal and Strange, 2004). In other words,
agglomeration can be regarded as both a cause and a consequence of labor produc-
tivity. Likewise, metropolitan spatial structure may be regarded as a consequence
rather than a cause of labor productivity growth. High land and real estate prices
in combination, driven by high levels of labor productivity in city centers, may
disperse people and firms out of the main cities into the wider metropolitan area.
In this case it is not spatial structure that directs metropolitan performance, but
metropolitan performance that directs spatial structure.
     Not accounting for simultaneity can lead to inconsistent estimates as this
violates one of the underlying assumptions of OLS: namely, that the independent
variables are uncorrelated with the disturbance term of the dependent variable.
(3) Usingcensus-region dummies (covering four broad geographical regions) yielded similar
empirical results.
Spatial structure and productivity in US metropolitan areas                           1393




In other words, the independent variables should not be affected by the dependent
variable. Probably the most common technique to deal with this (potential) simulta-
neity bias is to isolate the effect that runs from agglomeration and urban spatial
structure to labor productivity by means of a two-stage least squares (TSLS) estimation
(see also, Ciccone, 2002; Ciccone and Hall, 1996; Combes et al, 2008). In order to do
so, we need instruments, or variables that are correlated with the endogenous indepen-
dent variables but not with the dependent variable. Hence, they should be `relevant',
but at the same time `exogenous'. Based on Ciccone and Hall (1996), we used five
historical variables which are not related to labor productivity today, as production
60 ^ 150 years ago was organised in a very different way from today, but which did
significantly contribute to today's metropolitan size and spatial structure:
(1) the metropolitan population in 1950;
(2) the degree of polycentricity in 1950;
(3) the degree of dispersion in 1950;
(4) presence or absence of a railroad in the metropolitan area in 1860 (Stover, 1961);
and
(5) agricultural land use, measured as the density of employment in agriculture outside
the urban areas.
    The 1950 variables are constructed in exactly the same way as our 2006 variables
and their inclusion as instrumental variables is obvious. With respect to our railroad
variable, it is assumed that the presence or absence of railroads in 1860 was not driven by
modern productivity differences (Ciccone and Hall, 1996), but is important in explaining
agglomeration at the end of the 19th century and the development of other places
through suburbanization in the early 20th century. The agricultural land-use variable is
used as an instrument of dispersion: more extensive agricultural land use outside the
urban areas increases relative land rent as competition for land intensifies (Brueckner,
2001). This, in turn, slows down the development of housing and offices outside the
urban area compared with metropolitan areas in which nonurban land is relatively
cheap. Agricultural land use is, however, not related to our dependent variable as this
sector was excluded in the measurement of the labor productivity of metropolitan
areas.

5 Empirical results
5.1 Testing for endogeneity of metropolitan size and spatial structure
Although there may be a problem of recursive causality from a theoretical point of
view, this does not necessarily mean that there is a problem from an econometric point
of view (Combes et al, 2008). If indeed the independent variables of interest can be
treated as exogenous, then OLS, which is a more efficient estimator, should be prefer-
red over the TSLS estimator (Woolridge, 2006). In order to conduct such a test, the
instruments need to fulfil two general conditions: they should be relevant (not weak);
and valid (exogenous).
    Table 3 shows the test results on the relevance and validity of the instruments as
well as the endogeneity of metropolitan size and structure. The endogenous variables
were tested both separately and simultaneously. In other words, we ran three regres-
sions in which we instrumented metropolitan size, polycentricity, or dispersion,
and one regression in which we instrumented the three variables simultaneously.
We included more instruments than endogenous independent variables in each
specification in order to conduct an overidentfication test to assess the validity of
the instruments. On the basis of the Anderson canonical correlation, Cragg ^ Donald
F-statistic, and Shea partial R 2 -statistic, we can conclude that our instruments
1394                                                                           E J Meijers, M J Burger




are relevant.(4) With respect to testing the validity of the instruments, both the Sargan
and Basmann tests indicate that our instruments are valid.(5)
      Finally, we tested whether the endogenous independent variables included are also
econometrically endogenous. In this, Wu ^ Hausman F-test and Durbin ^ Wu ^ Hausman
w 2 -test assess the null hypothesis that the instrumental variables are exogenous by
Table 3. First-stage results of two-stage least-squares (TSLS) regressions on metropolitan labor
productivity.

                             Metropolitan size      Polycentricity       Dispersion     All

Instruments                  population             polycentricity       dispersion     population
                             in 1950;               in 1950;             in 1950;       in 1950;
                             railroad in 1860       railroad in 1860     agricultural   polycentricity
                                                                         land use       in 1950;
                                                                                        dispersion in
                                                                                        1950; railroad
                                                                                        in 1860;
                                                                                        agricultural
                                                                                        land use
Relevance
Anderson canonical             79.28**              44.63**              35.13**        36.89**
   correlation
Cragg ± Donald (CD)          114.05**               31.66**              22.11*           9.31**
   F-test
Critical value CD              19.93                19.93                19.93            6.06
   (10% relative bias)
Shea partial R 2
Metropolitan size               0.70                                                      0.75
Polycentricity                                       0.40                                 0.43
Dispersion                                                                0.31            0.33
Validity
Sargan statistic                0.29                 0.08                 0.00            1.00
Basmann statistic               0.25                 0.07                 0.00            0.86
Exogeneity
Wu ± Hausman F-test             4.78*                0.71                 0.02            1.85
Durbin ± Wu ± Hausman           5.31*                0.83                 0.02            6.24
  w 2 -test
Observations                 113                    113                  113            113
Regressors                    14                     14                   14             14
Instruments                   15                     15                   15             16
Excluded instruments           2                      2                    2              5
** p < 0:01, * p < 0:05.

(4) The  Anderson canonical correlation statistic is significant in all four specifications, meaning
that the instruments used in these specifications are adequate to identify the equation. The Cragg ^
Donald F-statistic tests whether we face a weak-instrument problem. A set of instruments is
defined as `weak' if the bias of the TSLS estimator, relative to the bias of the OLS estimator,
exceeds the threshold of 10% (Stock and Yogo, 2005) at the 5% confidence level. As can be seen
from table 3, this is the case for all specifications as the value of the Cragg ^ Donald F-statistic
exceeds the critical values provided by Stock and Yogo (2005). These results are reinforced by the
Shea partial R 2 -statistic, which is reasonably high for all specifications. In particular, metropolitan
size appears to be well instrumented.
(5) In this, whether the instruments for metropolitan size and spatial structure are uncorrelated with

the disturbance term is tested. As these overidentification test statistics were nonsignificant for all
four specifications, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the instruments are uncorrelated with
the disturbance term of the dependent variable and can be considered valid.
Spatial structure and productivity in US metropolitan areas                                1395




comparing the TSLS estimates with the OLS estimates. From these tests it can be
concluded that metropolitan spatial structure, defined by monocentricity ^ polycentricity
and centralization ^ dispersion, can be treated as exogenous. In line with Lee and
Gordon (2007), this is not surprising because spatial restructuring can be considered
a long-term process. However, for the specification in which metropolitan size is
instrumented, the Durbin ^ Wu ^ Hausman test rejects the hypothesis at a 5% confi-
dence level ( p ˆ 0:021). The estimation of this equation using the OLS estimator
would therefore not yield inconsistent results. Examining the specification with
multiple endogenous regressors, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that metropol-
itan size and metropolitan spatial structure are exogenous. As both the Wu ^ Hausman
F-test and Durbin ^ Wu ^ Hausman w 2 -test indicate that there is no evidence for an
endogenous relationship between labor productivity and metropolitan size and struc-
ture, OLS estimation should be used, given the fact that our instruments are relevant
and valid and OLS the more efficient test. However, we test for robustness of our
results by comparing the OLS estimates with the estimates from the TSLS specification
in which only metropolitan size is treated as endogenous.
5.2 Labor productivity, urbanization externalities, and spatial structure
Model 1 in table 4 shows the results of the OLS estimation of metropolitan size and
spatial structure on labor productivity, controlling for capital ^ labor ratio, land ^ labor
ratio, and education, and including census division fixed effects. The White ^ Koenker
test indicates that the null hypothesis that the residuals are homoskedastic cannot be
rejected, and the Ramsey RESET test shows that we do not face an omitted variable
bias problem. The VIF statistics indicate no multicollinearity problems. In general,
the model fits the data well, explaining about two thirds of the variance in labor
productivity across American metropolitan areas.
Table 4. Ordinary least squares (OLS) and two-stage least squares (TSLS) tests on metropolitan
labor productivity, 2006, with standard errors shown in parentheses (all nondummy variables are
mean-centered).

                                            Model 1 OLS               Model 2 TSLS a

Intercept                                   11.36 (0.110)**           11.28 (0.110)**
Capital ± labor ratio (ln)                   0.754 (0.232)**           0.843 (0.222)**
Land ± labor ratio (ln)                      0.013 (0.032)            ÿ0.012 (0.032)
Education per worker (ln)                   ÿ0.007 (0.050)            ÿ0.010 (0.047)
Metropolitan size (ln)                       0.107 (0.020)**           0.078 (0.023)**
Polycentricity (ln) b                        0.055 (0.023)*            0.051 (0.022)*
Dispersion (ln) c                            0.024 (0.039)             0.030 (0.036)
Census division dummies                     yes                       yes
Number of observations                      113                       113
F-statistic                                  13.48                     12.01
R 2 (OLS)/centered R 2 (TSLS)                 0.66                      0.65
Root MSE                                      0.12                      0.12
White ± Koenker (OLS)/Pagan ± Hall           22.7                      19.8
   test (TSLS)
Ramsey RESET test                              0.83                         0.03
** p < 0:01; * p < 0:05.
a Instruments used in the first stage of the regression for the endogenous variable metropolitan

population.
b The higher the value, the more polycentric; the lower the value, the more monocentric.
c The higher the value, the more dispersed; the lower the value, the more centralized.
1396                                                                  E J Meijers, M J Burger




     Turning to the main results, we find a positive and significant effect of the
capital ^ labor ratio (elasticity of 0.75) and no effect of the proportion of the work-
force with a bachelor's degree or higher on metropolitan labor productivity. However,
our main interest lies in examining the effect of metropolitan size and structure on
urban performance. In line with the existing empirical work on agglomeration, we find
a positive and significant effect of urbanization externalities on metropolitan labor
productivity. A doubling of metropolitan size increases metropolitan labor productivity
by over 10%. This is slightly higher than the consensus view öthat a doubling of city
size increases productivity by between 3% and 8% (Rosenthal and Strange, 2004)öand
the average of 5.4% found by Melo et al (2009) in a meta-analysis of such estimates.
     With respect to metropolitan spatial structure, we find mixed results in the sense
that we find a positive and significant effect of the degree of polycentricity on metropolitan
labor productivity, but no effect of the degree of dispersion. We had expected that
dispersion would have a negative effect on labor productivity, but this is not the case.
However, the positive effect of the degree of polycentricity on metropolitan labor produc-
tivity confirms our theoretical expectation. A doubling of the degree of polycentricity
increases metropolitan labor productivity by 5.5%. This means that the labor productivity
in metropolitan areas in which the urban population is relatively evenly spread over multiple
places in the metropolitan area leads to higher labor productivity than is found in metro-
politan areas in which the urban population is concentrated in one large city, holding
everything else constant. We elaborate on this important finding in the concluding section.
     Comparing the OLS and TSLS estimator (model 2 in table 4), it can be seen that
the urbanization externalities effect is over 25% less when estimated using TSLS
(elasticity of 0.078), while the effect of the capital ^ labor ratio is larger. The parameter
estimates of polycentricity and dispersion do not significantly differ across the models.
     Examining the two interaction effects between metropolitan structure and urban-
ization externalities (models 3 and 4 in table 5), the only negative effect we found is

Table 5. Ordinary least squares (OLS) and two-stage least squares (TSLS) tests on metropolitan
labor productivity, 2006öinteraction effects, with standard errors shown in parentheses (all
nondummy variables are mean-centered).

                                                      Model 3 OLS           Model 5 TSLS a

Intercept                                             11.33 (0.110)** a     11.26 (0.108)**
Capital ± labor ratio (ln)                             0.752 (0.229)**       0.824 (0.216)**
Land ± labor ratio (ln)                                0.002 (0.031)        ÿ0.018 (0.031)
Education per worker (ln)                              0.015 (0.049)         0.015 (0.045)
Metropolitan size (ln)                                 0.094 (0.021)**       0.072 (0.023)**
Polycentricity (ln)                                    0.037 (0.023)         0.033 (0.022)#
Dispersion (ln)                                        0.038 (0.039)         0.047 (0.037)
Metropolitan size  polycentricity                    ÿ0.059 (0.021)**      ÿ0.063 (0.020)**
Metropolitan size  dispersion                        ÿ0.008 (0.024)        ÿ0.016 (0.023)
Census division dummies                               yes                   yes
Number of observations                                113                   113
F-statistic                                            13.48                 12.11
R 2 (OLS)/centered R 2 (TSLS)                           0.68                  0.68
Root MSE                                                0.12                  0.11
White ± Koenker (OLS)/Pagan ± Hall test (TSLS)         21.11                 20.32
Ramsey RESET test                                       0.07                  1.09
** p < 0:01; * p < 0:05; p < 0:10.
a Instruments used in the first stage of the regression for endogenous variable metropolitan

population.
Spatial structure and productivity in US metropolitan areas                             1397




for the interaction between metropolitan size and polycentricity on metropolitan
labor productivity. The negative and significant interaction term can be interpreted
as due to the fact that urbanization externalities are larger in monocentric cities.
This confirms our theoretical assumption that polycentricity diminishes the effect of
size on labor productivity. We discuss the important theoretical implications of this
finding further in the next section. Similarly, it can also be interpreted as the benefits
of polycentricity holding more for smaller regions than for large regions (in terms of
population).

6 Conclusion and discussion
6.1 Main findings
Recent theoretical interest among geographers has turned to postindustrial forms of
urban agglomeration. The industrial image of a metropolitan area as being composed
of an urban core and a rural hinterland is in many cases becoming obsolete and
appears to be being replaced by increasingly polycentric metropolitan areas which
spread over larger territories, thereby including multiple cities which together constitute
a metropolitan network of cities. The `city' is becoming a regional phenomenon, and
calls have been made that this should also manifest itself in the study of agglomeration
economics as these seem to be associated also with wider, and more polycentric, forms
of metropolitan agglomeration rather than being confined to a single urban core
(Alonso, 1973; Cheshire, 2006; Kloosterman and Musterd, 2001; Parr, 2008; Phelps
and Ozawa, 2003). Despite these calls, however, several scholars have suggested that
empirical research on agglomeration externalities in relation to the regional urban
system is rather nonexistent, unlike to the more local scale of polycentric cities (Lee
and Gordon, 2007). An important reason for this empirical deficit is that many
existing empirical analyses of agglomeration still originate from definitions of metro-
politan areas which depart from a single nodal perspective. By this, we mean that the
vast majority of countries define functional urban areas as being one central city and
its hinterland, thereby ignoring the possibility of having multiple core cities. Moreover,
particularly in urban economics, spatial structure is hardly an issue and is often
approximated by general indicators such as size or density, which do not reveal much
detail of the spatial structure within regions.
     In this paper we take up this empirical challenge by analyzing how different spatial
structures affect the development of agglomeration externalities in US metropolitan
areas in 2006 with over 250 000 inhabitants. Externalities were measured in terms of
labor productivity. The widest official delimination of metropolitan areas (CSAs) was
used, and these were supplemented with MSAs which do not form part of such CSAs.
     As regards spatial structure, we assumed that, as well as size, two dimensions are
important as these affect urban concentration within the region: (1) the monocentricity ^
polycentricity dimension which indicates the extent to which the urban population is
concentrated in one urban centre (monocentricity), or spread over multiple urban
centres in a metropolitan area in a balanced way (polycentricity); and, (2) the central-
ization ^ dispersion dimension, which indicates the extent to which the metropolitan
population is concentrated in centers. In addition to these indicators relating to
spatial structure, we controlled for the capital ^ labor ratio, land ^ labor ratio, and human
capital.
     The empirical analysis in this paper resulted in four findings concerning the
relationship between a region's spatial structure and its economic performance in
terms of labor productivity.
1398                                                                E J Meijers, M J Burger




(1) Metropolitan areas with more dispersion do not perform worse in terms of labor
productivity.
    Whether a large part of the population is concentrated in urban centers or lives
outside of these centers in the nonurban part of the metropolitan area was not found
to influence labor productivity. Thus we found no evidence for the expectation that
dispersion is harmful to labor productivity.
(2) Metropolitan areas which are more polycentric show higher labor productivity.
    We found a positive and significant direct effect of the degree of polycentricity on
labor productivity. The more evenly the population is spread across the different
places in a metropolitan area, the higher the labor productivity in that metropolitan
area. As labor productivity proxies the balance between agglomeration economies
and diseconomies, we can conclude that this balance is better in the more polycentric
metropolitan areas. This can be explained by the assumption that urbanization disecon-
omies are less in the more polycentric areas, and the idea that urbanization economies
have `regionalized' to some extent whereas `urbanization diseconomies' appear to be
confined to the city boundaries. So this result appears to confirm ideas that agglom-
eration externalities spread over lager distances, and may interact in regions where
multiple urban places, and hence multiple source of agglomeration externalities,
are colocated. As such, it confirms that agglomeration economies need to be con-
ceptualized in relational terms. Thus, as Phelps and Ozawa (2003) proposed, external
economies are not confined to a single urban core but, instead, appear to be shared
among a group of functionally linked settlements. This last appears to be the case for the
relatively more polycentric metropolitan areas. Finding 3, however, qualifies the extent
to which this `regionalization' of agglomeration economies takes place.
(3) The effect of metropolitan size decreases as metropolitan areas become more polycentric.
    Metropolitan size tends to reflect the presence of urbanization externalities. It was
found that the degree of polycentricity has an indirect effect on labor productivity as
urbanization externalities are fewer in the more polycentric metropolitan areas. Put
differently, the productivity gains of size diminish as the metropolitan area becomes
more polycentric. These results are in line with a previous finding (Meijers, 2008a), that
the more polycentric a region was, the fewer cultural, leisure, and sports amenities
were present. It also confirms the doubts raised by Parr (2004; 2008) and Bailey
and Turok (2001) that the magnitude of urbanization externalities in a polycentric
metropolitan area is less compared with a monocentric metropolitan area. From a
theoretical perspective, we cannot expect the advantages based on density, proximity,
and the easy and sometimes unplanned exchange of information to be equally
present in a metropolitan area in which population is spread over multiple smaller
cities as in one where the population is concentrated in a single large city. This result
means that a collection of cities does not provide a substitute for the urbanization
externalities of a single large city, even though the size of the population in both
metropolitan areas may be similar.
(4) Polycentricity appears to be more beneficial in smaller metropolitan areas.
    Our findings on the interaction effect could also be interpreted as indicating that
the positive effect of having a relatively more polycentric spatial structure on labor
productivity found here decreases as the population size of the metropolitan area
increases. A possible reason for polycentricity being relatively more beneficial in smaller
metropolitan areas is that cities in smaller polycentric metropolitan areas may be more
Spatial structure and productivity in US metropolitan areas                                      1399




functionally related than those in larger polycentric metropolitan areas. This needs to
be tested, however.
6.2 Research agenda
More generally, the relation between the strength and extent of functional linkages
between cities in a metropolitan area and their performance as a regional urban system
deserves further exploration. Also, external linkages between more distant metropoli-
tan regions require our attention. The idea that such external linkages are of great
importance in explaining metropolitan performance appears to hold in particular for
the largest metropolitan areas, as these are the main locations for knowledge-intensive
activities such as advanced producer services and, as such, the centers in the global
network of information and knowledge exchange (Hall and Pain, 2006; Sassen, 1991).
In this respect, it would be interesting to see whether agglomeration externalities are
also shared between even more distant cities. Other important research issues following
from our findings concern whether the gap in urbanization externalities between more
polycentric and more monocentric metropolitan areas is increasing or diminishing with
time, whether typical agglomeration disadvantages are indeed less severe in polycentric
metropolitan areas, and whether the effects of spatial structure on productivity levels
differ across sectors.
Acknowledgements. Evert Meijers wishes to thank the funding provided by the Netherlands Orga-
nisation for Scientific Research (NWO). The paper has benefited from well thought-out comments
by Nick Phelps as well as three anonymous reviewers.
References
Alonso W, 1973, ``Urban zero population growth'' Daedalus 109 191 ^ 206
Anas A, Arnott R, Small K A, 1998, ``Urban spatial structure'' Journal of Economic Literature
    36 1426 ^ 1464
Bailey N, Turok I, 2001, ``Central Scotland as a polycentric urban region: useful planning concept
    or chimera? '' Urban Studies 38 697 ^ 715
Bertaud A, 2004, ``The spatial organization of cities: deliberate outcome or unforeseen
    consequence? '', WP 2004-01, Institute of Urban and Regional Development, Berkeley, CA
Boarnet M G, 1994,``An empirical model of intermetropolitan population and employment growth''
    Papers in Regional Science 73 135 ^ 152
Broersma L, Oosterhaven J, 2009, ``Regional labour productivity in The Netherlands: evidence
    of agglomeration and congestion effects'' Journal of Regional Science 49 483 ^ 511
Brueckner J K, 2001, ``Urban sprawl: lessons from urban economics'', in Brookings ^ Wharton
    Papers on Urban Affairs Eds W G Gale, J Rothenberg Pack (Brookings Institution Press,
    Washington, DC) pp 65 ^ 89
Bru«lhart M, Mathys N A, 2008,``Sectoral agglomeration economies in a panel of European regions''
    Regional Science and Urban Economics 38 348 ^ 362
Burger M J, van Oort F G, Frenken K, van der Knaap B, 2009, ``Networks and economic
    agglomerations'' Tijdschrift voor Economische en Sociale Geografie 100 139 ^ 144
Burger M J, van Oort F G, van der Knaap B, 2010, ``A treatise of the geographical scale of
    agglomeration externalities and the modifiable areal unit problem'' Scienze Regionali
    forthcoming
Capello R, 2000, ``The city network paradigm: measuring urban network externalities'' Urban
    Studies 37 1925 ^ 1945
Capello R, Camagni R, 2000, ``Beyond optimal city size: an evaluation of alternative urban growth
    patterns'' Urban Studies 37 1479 ^ 1496
Cheshire P C, 2006, ``Resurgent cities, urban myths and policy hubris: what we need to know''
    Urban Studies 43 1231 ^ 1246
Ciccone A, 2002, ``Agglomeration effects in Europe'' European Economic Review 46 213 ^ 227
Ciccone A, Hall R E, 1996, ``Productivity and the density of economic activity''American Economic
    Review 86 54 ^ 70
Coe N M, Townsend A R, 1998,``Debunking the myth of localized agglomerations: the development
    of a regionalized service economy in south-east England'' Transactions of the Institute of British
    Geographers, New Series 23 385 ^ 404
1400                                                                        E J Meijers, M J Burger




Combes P P, Mayer T, Thisse J F, 2008 Economic Geography: The Integration of Regions and Nations
    (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ)
Corpataux J, Crevoisier O, 2007, ``Economic theories and spatial transformations clarifying the
    space ^ time premises and outcomes of economic theories'' Journal of Economic Geography
    7 285 ^ 309
de Goei B, Burger M J, Kitson M, van Oort F G, 2009, ``Functional polycentrism and urban
    network development in the greater South East UK: evidence from commuting patterns''
    Regional Studies forthcoming
Florida R, Gulden T, Mellander C, 2008, ``The rise of the mega-region'' Cambridge Journal of
    Regions, Economy and Society 1 459 ^ 476
Fogarty M, Garofolo G, 1988, ``Urban spatial structure and productivity growth in the
    manufacturing sector of cities'' Journal of Urban Economics 23 60 ^ 70
Frenken K, van Oort F G, Verburg T, 2007, ``Related variety, unrelated variety and economic
    growth'' Regional Studies 41 685 ^ 697
Fujita M, Thisse J F, Zenou Y, 1997, ``On the endogenous formation of secondary employment
    centres in a city'' Journal of Urban Economics 41 337 ^ 357
Glaeser E L, Kahn M E, 2004, ``Sprawl and urban growth'', in Handbook of Regional Science
    and Urban Economics, Volume 4: Cities and Geography Eds J V Henderson, J-F Thisse
    (Elsevier, Amsterdam) pp 2481 ^ 2527
Goffette-Nagot F, Schmitt B, 1999, ``Agglomeration economies and spatial configurations in rural
    areas'' Environment and Planning A 31 1239 ^ 1257
Gordon I, McCann P, 2000, ``Industrial clusters: complexes, agglomeration and/or social
    networks? '' Urban Studies 37 513 ^ 532
Green N, 2007, ``Functional polycentricity: a formal definition in terms of social network analysis''
    Urban Studies 44 2077 ^ 2103
Hall P, 2000,``Global city-regions in the twenty-first century'', in Global City Regions:Trends,Theory,
    Policy Ed. A J Scott (Oxford University Press, Oxford) pp 59 ^ 77
Hall P, Pain K, 2006 The Polycentric Metropolis: Learning from Mega-city Regions in Europe
    (Earthscan, London)
Hohenberg P, Lees L, 1985 The Making of Urban Europe, 1000 ^ 1994 (Harvard University Press,
    Cambridge, MA)
Isard W, 1956 Location and Space Economy (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA)
Johansson B, Quigley J M, 2004, ``Agglomeration and networks in spatial economies'' Papers in
    Regional Science 83 165 ^ 176
Kim S, 2007, ``Changes in the nature of urban spatial structure in the United States, 1890 ^ 2000''
    Journal of Regional Science 47 273 ^ 287
Kloosterman R C, Lambregts B, 2001, ``Clustering of economic activities in polycentric urban
    regions: the case of the Randstad'' Urban Studies 38 717 ^ 732
Kloosterman R C, Musterd S, 2001, ``The polycentric urban region: towards a research agenda''
    Urban Studies 38 623 ^ 633
Lambooy J G, 1998,``Polynucleation and economic development: the Randstad'' European Planning
    Studies 6 457 ^ 466
Lee B, Gordon P, 2007, ``Urban spatial structure and economic growth in US metropolitan areas'',
    paper presented at the 46th annual meeting of the Western Regional Science Association,
    Newport Beach, CA, http://www-rcf.usc.edu/pgordon/pdf/structure growth 200701.pdf
Meijers E J, 2005, ``Polycentric urban regions and the quest for synergy: is a network of cities
    more than the sum of the parts? '' Urban Studies 42 765 ^ 781
Meijers E J, 2008a, ``Summing small cities does not make a large city: polycentric urban regions
    and the provision of cultural, leisure and sports amenities'' Urban Studies 45 2323 ^ 2345
Meijers E J, 2008b, ``Measuring polycentricity and its promises'' European Planning Studies
    16 1313 ^ 1323
Melo P C, Graham D J, Noland R B, 2009, ``A meta-analysis of estimates of urban agglomeration
    economies'' Regional Science and Urban Economics 39 332 ^ 342
Nordregio (lead partner) (Ed.), 2004, ``ESPON 1.1.1: potentials for polycentric development in
    Europe'', project report, Nordregio/ESPON Monitoring Committee, Stockholm/Luxembourg
OMB, 2000 Standards for Defining Metropolitan and Micropolitan Regions Federal Register 65,
    No. 249, Office of Management and Budget, Washington, DC
Parr J B, 2002,``Agglomeration economies: ambiguities and confusions'' Environment and Planning A
    34 717 ^ 731
Parr J B, 2004, ``The polycentric urban region: a closer inspection'' Regional Studies 38 231 ^ 240
Spatial structure and productivity in US metropolitan areas                                      1401




Parr J B, 2005, ``Perspectives on the city-region'' Regional Studies 39 555 ^ 566
Parr J B, 2008, ``Cities and regions: problems and potentials'' Environment and Planning A 40
    3009 ^ 3026
Phelps N A, Ozawa T, 2003, ``Contrasts in agglomeration: proto-industrial, industrial and
    post-industrial forms compared'' Progress in Human Geography 27 583 ^ 604
Phelps N A, Fallon R J, Williams C L, 2001, ``Small firms, borrowed size and the urban ^ rural
    shift'' Regional Studies 35 613 ^ 624
Richardson H W, 1995, ``Economies and diseconomies of agglomeration'', in Urban Agglomeration
    and Economic Growth Ed. H Giersch (Springer, Berlin) pp 123 ^ 155
Rosenthal S S, Strange W C, 2004, ``Evidence on the nature and sources of agglomeration
    economies'', in Handbook of Regional Science and Urban Economics, Volume 4: Cities and
    Geography Eds J V Henderson, J-F Thisse (Elsevier, Amsterdam) pp 2119 ^ 2171
Sassen S,1991The Global City: NewYork, London,Tokyo (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ)
Sassen S, 2007, ``Megaregions: benefits beyond sharing trains and parking lots? '', in The Economic
    Geography of Mega-regions Ed. K S Goldfield (The Policy Research Institute for the Region,
    Princeton, NJ) pp 59 ^ 83
Scott A J, 1988 Metropolis: From the Division of Labor to Urban Form (University of California
    Press, Berkeley, CA)
Scott A J, 2000, ``Economic geography: the great half-century'' Cambridge Journal of Economics
    24 483 ^ 504
Siegel P, Johnson T, Alwang J, 1995, ``Regional economic diversity and diversification'' Growth
    and Change 26 261 ^ 284
Stock J H,Yogo M, 2005,``Testing for weak instruments in linear IV regression'', in Identification and
    Inference for Econometric Models: Essays in Honor of Thomas Rothenberg Eds D W K Andrews,
    J H Stock (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge) pp 80 ^ 108
Storper M, 1997 The Regional World: Territorial Development in a Global Economy (Guilford Press,
    New York)
Stover J F, 1961 American Railroads (The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL)
Transportation Research Board, 2002 Costs of Sprawl ö 2000 (National Academy Press,
    Washington, DC)
Turok I, Bailey N, 2004, ``The theory of polynuclear urban regions and its application to central
    Scotland'' European Planning Studies 12 371 ^ 389
van Oort F G, 2004 Urban Growth and Innovation, Spatially Bounded Externalities in the Netherlands
    (Ashgate, Aldershot, Hants)
van Oort F G, Burger M J, Raspe O, 2010, ``On the economic foundation of the urban network
    paradigm: spatial integration, functional integration and economic complementarities within
    the Dutch Randstad'' Urban Studies 47 725 ^ 748
Woolridge J M, 2006 Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach (Thomson South-Western
    Educational Publishing, Mason, OH)
1402                                                            E J Meijers, M J Burger




Appendix
Selection of metropolitan regions
In principle, all CSAs as well as MSAs not part of a CSA with a total population of
more than 250 000 inhabitants in 2006 located in the US continental states were
included in the analysis. Metropolitan areas are defined by the US Office of Manage-
ment and Budget (OMB), and the 2007 revised version of the 2000 definitional stand-
ards was used. An MSA contains a core urban area with a population of 50 000 or
more. It consists of one or more counties, and includes the counties containing the
core urban area as well as any adjacent counties of which more than 25% of employed
residents work in the urban core. MSAs which are adjacent may be joined in order
to form a Combined Statistical Area if the employment interchange is at least 25.
Adjacent MSAs which have an employment interchange measure of at least 15 and
less than 25 are combined if local opinion favors combination (OMB, 2000). There are
also `micropolitan' areas which contain an urban core with a population of at least
10 000 but less than 50 000. These are not considered here, unless they form part of a
CSA that is also composed of at least one MSA.
    Some regions had to be left out for other reasons:
(1) CSAs are composed of metropolitan statistical areas and/or micropolitan statis-
tical areas. Often, data were not available for micropolitan areas. In a limited
number of cases, this meant that no reliable data for the CSA could be retrieved.
There were two CSAs in which more than 20% of their population was located
in a micropolitan statistical area; these were left out for this reason. These were
Charlotte ^ Gastonia ^ Salisbury, NC ^ SC; Fort Wayne ^ Huntington ^ Auburn, IN; and
Lexington ^ Fayette ^ Franfort ^ Richmond, KY.
(2) New Orleans was left out as the data appeared biased as a result of Hurricane
Katrina.
    As argued in the text, polycentric conurbations had to be left out. These include:
Albany ^ Schenectady ^ Amsterdam, NY;
Charleston ^ North Charleston, SC;
Dallas ^ Fort Worth, TX;
Davenport ^ Moline ^ Rock Island, IA ^ IL;
Fayetteville ^ Springdale ^ Rogers, AR ^ MO;
Hartford ^ West Hartford ^ East Hartford, CT;
McAllen ^ Edinburg ^ Mission, TX;
Miami ^ Fort Lauderdale ^ Miami Beach, FL;
Minneapolis ^ St. Paul ^ St. Cloud, MN ^ WI;
Palm Bay ^ Melbourne ^ Titusville, FL;
Provo-Orem, UT;
Sarasota ^ Bradenton ^ Punta Gorda, FL;
Scranton ^ Wilkes ^ Barre, PA;
Tampa ^ St. Petersburg ^ Clearwater, FL;
Virginia Beach ^ Norfolk ^ Newport N., VA ^ NC.




                                                        ß 2010 Pion Ltd and its Licensors
Conditions of use. This article may be downloaded from the E&P website for personal research
by members of subscribing organisations. This PDF may not be placed on any website (or other
online distribution system) without permission of the publisher.
