[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: journal/B20-bekes-harastosi-2018-grid-and-shake-spatial-aggregation-and-the-robustness-of-regionally-estimated-elasticities-10.1007-s00168-017-0849-y.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Title:           Grid and shake: spatial aggregation and the robustness of regionally estimated elasticities
Subject:         The Annals of Regional Science, doi:10.1007/s00168-017-0849-y
Keywords:        R12,R30,C15
Author:          Gábor Békés
Creator:         Springer
Producer:        Acrobat Distiller 10.1.8 (Windows)
CreationDate:    Sat Oct  7 13:36:41 2017 WIB
ModDate:         Mon Dec 18 14:07:02 2017 WIB
Custom Metadata: yes
Metadata Stream: yes
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            AcroForm
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           28
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       439.37 x 666.142 pts
Page rot:        0
File size:       6165899 bytes
Optimized:       yes
PDF version:     1.6
[Extracted Text]
Ann Reg Sci (2018) 60:143–170
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00168-017-0849-y

ORIGINAL PAPER



Grid and shake: spatial aggregation and the robustness
of regionally estimated elasticities

Gábor Békés1 · Péter Harasztosi2




Received: 29 July 2016 / Accepted: 26 September 2017 / Published online: 7 October 2017
© Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany 2017



Abstract This paper proposes a simple and transparent method for measuring spatial
robustness of regionally estimated coefficients and considers the role of the admin-
istrative districts and of the size of regions. The procedure offers a new solution
for a practical empirical issue: comparing the variables of interest across spatially
aggregated units. It improves upon existing methods, especially when spatial units are
heterogeneous. To illustrate the method, we use Hungarian data and compare estimates
of agglomeration externalities at various levels of aggregation. Using the procedure,
we find that the method of spatial aggregation seems to be of equal importance to the
specification of the econometric model.

JEL Classification R12 · R30 · C15



1 Introduction

The concentration of economic activity is a key feature of economic geography; it
is a well-researched topic in economics, and the polarization of activity is often a
policy concern. As a result, measuring the agglomeration elasticity of market outcome




Péter Harasztosi: The opinions expressed are those of the author(s) only and should not be considered as
representative of the European Commission’s official position.

B Gábor Békés
    bekesg@ceu.edu

1   Institute of Economics of CERS-HAS and CEPR, Central European University, 13 Nador street,
    Budapest 1051, Hungary
2   Joint Research Centre, Via Fermi 2749, 21027 Ispra, VA, Italy


                                                                                            123
144                                                                              G. Békés, P. Harasztosi


variables such as wages, firm dynamics, or competition is of substantial importance.1
Oftentimes, these studies are based on an arbitrary choice of spatial unit—cities,
counties or regions—and shall be hence interested in the robustness of their results
given the choice of unit. Furthermore, we may be interested in comparing results
obtained on one country to estimates from another.
   Hence, we need to understand how the specific characteristics of selecting the fea-
tures of spatial units may affect the outcome of an estimation exercise. This paper will
present a method to transparently investigate the impact of modeling choices of spatial
aggregation that can be applied in any spatial setting with different layers of aggrega-
tion. The method will allow us to compare the magnitude of differences to aggregation
to those resulting from running different regression with different controls.2
   The unit of spatial scope can make a difference since externalities are often found to
be in operation but fading away at a distance. For instance, Fotheringham and Wong
(1991) argued that the features of areal units affect regression results—often in an
uncertain fashion—while Dewhurst and McCann (2007) supplied evidence that the
relationship between specialization and urban structure is a function of the scale of
analysis. Using UK data on administrative units, they found a strong negative rela-
tionship between regional specialization and regional size. Burger et al. (2010) found
different effects of agglomeration forces across geographic levels in the Netherlands.
More recently, Larsson (2014) investigated how the wage density elasticity depends
on spatial resolution in Swedish city areas and highlighted how quickly agglomeration
effects attenuate with distance. Furthermore, the size of observation units and some of
their features may be correlated and hence, estimates may be biased. For instance, large
municipalities may be clustered in space because of first geography, specialization in
agriculture, hard barriers to migration, distance to markets—crucial aspects of spatial
economic structure that we may be looking at. Furthermore, the spatial scope of an
activity may or may not coincide with the spatial scope of a political-administrative
unit. At the same time, policies may affect relationships wherever interacted. Hence,
any measurement at some regional level should combine the role of size (inclusion of
externalities within) as well as the possible impact of regional policies.
   Consequently, there is a need to compare in a statistically meaningful way esti-
mation results across spatial units of different sizes taking into account the uneven
(non-random) distribution of unit size. To this end, this paper offers a transparent,
easy-to-use method.
   The core idea of our procedure is to set up an artificial grid over the map of the coun-
try, assign municipalities (or ZIP codes) to it and then randomize the position of the grid
to get a distribution of results. To do this, first, we create a grid of squares of a given size,
L. Second, we take this grid of L × L squares and randomize its place on a map and, as
a result, obtain a set of random realizations of artificial spatial units. By repeating this


1 See, for instance, Ciccone and Hall (1996) on the relationship between labor productivity and agglom-
eration, Ács and Armington (2004) on entrepreneurship. Examples on local aspect of activity include Iyer
and Seetharaman (2008) on retail prices, Hortaçsu and Syverson (2007) on local competition and vertical
integration, Gobillon and Milcent (2013) on hospital performance.
2 Note that our questions are closely related to that of Amrhein (1995) who argued that aggregation may
be indeed an important methodological choice.


123
Grid and shake: Spatial aggregation and the robustness of…                                             145


procedure (in this paper 300 times) we can get smooth kernel distributions. Third, we
iron out the border effect by merging very small areas into bigger ones. Finally, we run
our regression on each of these realizations and gather coefficients that yield a distri-
bution of our parameters of interest. After this procedure, we can look at moments of
this distribution, relate the distribution of coefficients to a single measure, for example,
at the administrative regional unit, or compare distributions from two randomizations.
    Our method is related to several earlier approaches proposed to treat the spatial
aspects of estimations. The treatment of the location issue will often include spatial
regression methods, and spatial lags in various forms have been widely used to gauge
uncertainty about the right spatial scope (Anselin 2010). Artificial aggregation methods
were also put forward. Amrhein and Flowerdew (1992) studied Canadian migration
data both along region size and created artificial regions by setting a seed and randomly
adding neighbors. In a close exercise to ours, Briant et al. (2010) placed starting points
randomly on the map and added up an equal number of municipalities until the country
was fully covered. Also closely related to this work is Menon (2012) who studied
concentration patterns of US industries to disentangle labor market forces and set up
a counter-factual exercise.3
    We will be arguing that our method has the following merits: (i) it allows for carrying
out estimations at various levels of aggregation and compare evidence; (ii) it treats
uneven and non-random distribution of administrative unit size; (iii) it has the ability
to compare results on administrative and artificial units, and (iv) it is able to gauge the
statistical significance of differences. We will show that existing methods can match
some but not all of these merits.
    To illustrate our procedure, we will use Hungarian data—see an illustrative map of
Fig. 1. Hungary is a country of 10 million inhabitants, over 93 thousand square kilo-
meters, with 3125 municipalities. There are 150 micro-regions (kistérség), 20 NUTS3
(megye) and seven NUTS2 regions defined—see details in Table 3 of “Appendix” sec-
tion. At the time of our empirical exercises, administrative duties had been shared by
municipalities, micro-regions and NUTS3 regions. Briant et al. (2010) argued (p 301)
that for historical reasons yielding very similar regions, the French data are well suited
for their approach. We believe that for historical and geographic reasons, the Hungarian
landscape is rather different and its unbalanced size distribution offers a laboratory
to study our method of spatial aggregation and allow for a comparison with other
approaches, such as the one by Briant et al. (2010).
    We will consider two examples, estimating the agglomeration premium of wages
and new firm formation, and we compare elasticities at two administrative units, i.e.,
municipal (NUTS5) and micro-region (NUTS4) levels, and for three artificial units. We
are interested in the relationship between an estimated coefficient at an administrative
regional level and a comparable estimate for an artificial region of similar size as well
as how the average size of the defined area affects the estimated coefficient. Further, our
method will be compared to earlier approaches and we argue that our methodology
is better able to capture some important real-life features such as the non-random

3 There is a growing amount of related literature on a different type of setup, when the data are geocoded.
For instance, Dubé and Brunelle (2014) argued that distance-based concentration measures may offer a
good solution.


                                                                                              123
146                                                                 G. Békés, P. Harasztosi




Fig. 1 Map of Hungary at municipal level



heterogeneity of the size of areal units, such as municipalities and regions. We will
discuss similarities and differences with regard to other methods, in particular, with
respect to Briant et al. (2010) whose method we replicated.
   In what follows, we first describe key issues that shed light on why measurement
methodology matters. Section 3 introduces the methodology we developed, and in
Sect. 4, we illustrate the method introducing two examples and present the empirical
results and compare our method with some existing approaches. The last section
concludes.


2 Considerations for measurement

Before discussing the method we are proposing, let us present some key considera-
tions that motivated the procedure. First, we argue that unit size matters and there is
a need to compare results across spatial units of different sizes. Second, uneven and
non-random distribution of unit size matters as well. Third, in the presence of policy
aspects, we will be able to understand the influence of administrative borders when
investigating political-administrative unit size effects. Finally, instead of a randomly
chosen robustness test, we should be able to perform statistical inferences and hypoth-
esis testing. At each subsection, we will present some arguments why a particular
measurement issue may matter.


2.1 Unit size matters, scalability is key

There is substantial evidence suggesting that the impact of spatial externalities decays
rapidly with distance, and measured elasticities will be altered based on the unit size

123
Grid and shake: Spatial aggregation and the robustness of…                                               147


of measurement. Hence, the presence of externalities may be detected at some level of
spatial unit, but not at another. This issue is partly an econometric problem: a mismatch
between the spatial unit of observation and the spatial extent of the phenomena under
consideration will result in spatial measurement errors and spatial autocorrelation
between these error terms in adjoining locations (Anselin and Bera 1998). Uncertainty
and practical differences regarding unit size may hinder comparing evidence across
countries or regions.
   Consider the example of EU regions so that we can see how the level of aggrega-
tion changes correlation inferences as well. Figure 11 shows the population density
distribution of Western European countries at NUTS1 and NUTS3 level (see Fig. 11
in “Appendix” section). One can see that even within the same administrative level
the size and shape of the basic units differ a lot. For example, the correlation between
population density and GDP per capita across European regions at NUTS1 level is
0.74. The same relationship at the more disaggregated level of NUTS3 administrative
units is much weaker, i.e., 0.54.4 This difference may be of purely random nature
or related to the spatial decay of some relationships. For instance, the impact of an
externality may weaken over distance for a wide range of activities such as the trade
of intermediate inputs, productivity and wages and knowledge spillovers.5
   Hence, the first important requirement is for a methodology that can be scaled by
size of units of observation (i.e., compare distributions from two randomization runs
(at L 1 × L 1 -sized grid and another one at an L 2 × L 2 grid), thereby allowing for a
direct comparison.


2.2 Uneven and non-random distribution of unit size matters

The second issue is that spatial units are not only of uneven size, but they are non-
randomly located, potentially biasing results. The spatial correlation of unit size (such
as very small villages are collated in a particular geographic region) may stem from
several sources: maybe first geography (lakes or mountains) prompts people to orga-
nize themselves into small units, or dense urban areas set up small but populous spatial
units. The political use of spatial units may also lead to some clustering that is possibly
related to historical population density or institutions such as fairs. Districts tend to
have an equalizing role across population. In some countries and at some levels of
aggregation this could be a very minor issue. In France, for example, departments are
fairly equal sized.6 However, this is not the case in most countries and regions. In fact,

4 We use the 2007 euro per capita measure of GDP and the 2006–2008 average population density data
from the Eurostat regional databases. The countries that constitute our sample: the UK, Germany, Belgium,
France, Spain, Portugal, the Netherlands and Italy.
5 For instance, trade proximity matters for localization for about 50 km as suggested by Duranton and
Overman (2008) for manufacturing industries in Britain. Rosenthal and Strange (2008) estimated that in the
USA wage increasing effect of being close to educated people falls to just 25% as the distance rises from 5
to 15 miles in the USA. Lychagin et al. (2010) found that the crucial range for proximity to laboratories is
limited to 100–200 km. Andersson et al. (2016) document and attenuation of wage density elasticity even
within cities.
6 Note that, shape of units may be of interest. Briant et al. (2010) showed it does not matter. However, even
though shape is not of our immediate concern here, the method presented caters for different shapes as well.


                                                                                                123
148                                                                                     G. Békés, P. Harasztosi


when looking at the EU NUTS3 regions above and observing the representation of
population density distribution, it is obvious that the dense regions are much smaller.
Importantly, not only do we see that small and large regions are clustered (i.e., North
European regions are small, and Spanish regions are large), but that this is correlated
with first geography (Spanish mountains, access to Atlantic trade routes) and urban-
ization (abundance of mid-sized North German cities, possibly related to the system
of Länder).
   Take another example. In this paper, we will work with data from Hungary,
where the municipal and micro-regional structure is rather unbalanced (See Fig. 1
in Sect. 4.1)—unlike in France, where the large administrative regions called départe-
ments are of about equal size. We see an average municipal size of 15–20 km2
in the southwest and 70–75 km2 in the northeast, and there is a great deal of
variation in the size of micro-regions, as shown in Table 3. The small size of typ-
ical administrative units in the southwest is correlated with rugged terrain, history,
and agricultural traditions. These are all issues that may bias the estimated coeffi-
cients.7
   Therefore, the more disaggregated data one uses, the more the number of dense
regions increases in the sample. This may affect inferences about concentration
and also gives less weight to less populated areas, and given its correlation with
other variables such as first nature geography, it may bias results. In other words
the size distribution of density and hence productivity (or wage) are endogenously
determined by the aggregation level of administrative units. The more densely
populated a location is at the most disaggregated level (municipality), the most
likely it is to be aggregated up with other locations at the higher aggregation level
(region).
   Consequently, the second expectation is the ability to treat the clustering of large
or small units and thus the ability to compare aggregated units of the same size rather
than the same sub-units.


2.3 The role of administrative borders can be directly investigated

The third issue is related to administrative unit borders.8 Regions are often units with
political or administrative roles, where local bureaucracies set policies on the labor
market (often by regional employment agencies), taxes (such as Bacher and Brül-
hart 2013), firm subsidies (by regional development agencies) or regulation (e.g., by
regional environment protection agencies). Regional differences may play an explicit
role when grants are given based on some average regional development measure such


7 When regressing the (log) number of municipalities within a district on (log) wages, we find a negative
correlation. This is primarily due to the fact that there are plenty of small municipalities close to Vienna with
easy market access and higher wages. Using a cross section, we have: log(N um) = 11.8+0.8×log(Wage),
significant at 5%; log(N o) = 1.41 + 0.05 × log(W age) + 0.45 × log(Distance Budapest ) − 0.24 ×
log(DistanceV ienna ), where both distance variables are significant at 1%.
8 In some countries, like Hungary, municipality also contains the agricultural land. In Hungary, Eastern
municipalities have larger plots of land and hence, Western municipalities will be calculated as denser.


123
Grid and shake: Spatial aggregation and the robustness of…                                         149


as per capita GDP, income or unemployment. It may be an explicit research question
to seek to understand the effectiveness of such policies.9
   Hence, the ability to compare administrative regions with a set of artificially defined
spatial units matching the average regional size may offer a useful insight. As a result,
the third requirement is hence the capacity to compare administrative regional units
with artificial units where the size of the units are kept to match (on average) the
administrative regional size. With our model, we can compare this distribution of
coefficients gathered from the randomized L × L grid to the single measure, say, at
the administrative regional unit level. This allows us to understand to what extent we
have a special realization of results; whether can we claim, for instance, that 95% of
the grids yield a smaller or larger coefficient than the administrative one.


2.4 Statistically differentiating estimations

A key drawback of estimations using administrative units is the lack of robustness.
One estimates a model and gets a point estimate that may be influenced by policies,
some special first geography issue (rivers, mountains). The argument that location
specifics may influence estimation is indeed a core idea of the Modifiable Unit Area
Problem or the MAUP. As a result, any particular aggregation may suffer from a set
of idiosyncratic shocks, for example, particularities of regional border. To see the
robustness of a particular relationship, one may need to go beyond comparisons and
understand the statistical significance of the differences in elasticities measured at
various levels of aggregation. To allow for comparisons across different sized units as
well as artificial versus administrative units, the method will have to able to generate
randomized aggregation outcomes allowing to create standard errors for regression
outcomes at various levels of aggregation.


3 The “grid and shake” method

This section presents a new method, that we dubbed “grid and shake.” Before the
actual estimations, several steps are needed. First, we digitize the map by placing
markers evenly on the country and hence pinning down municipalities. Second, we
define a grid made up of L × L squares and place it over the map. Our markers will
help assigning each municipality to a particular unit in the grid. Third, we define the
grid unit size based on some economic consideration, such as matching the average
size of administrative units. Fourth, we shake this grid and thus, randomly create pos-
sible realizations of spatial units. Finally, we make cosmetic adjustments around the
country’s zigzagging borders to avoid having too small units. When running regres-
sions, we can repeat any given regression on all realizations and thus get a distribution
of elasticities. In what follows, we present step-by-step details using Hungary as an
example to illustrate the method.

9 See Dewhurst and McCann (2007) looking at a relationship between size and specialization in different
types of administrative levels in the UK, or Devereux et al. (2007) studying UK “Regional Selective
Assistance” grants given to regional political units.


                                                                                          123
150                                                                                G. Békés, P. Harasztosi


3.1 Setting up the grid

To collect municipalities into spatial groups of an approximately equal size, we use
an idea analogous to offset printing technology. First, we place markers arranged in a
raster-like manner on the map with the lowest available units such as municipalities
or ZIP codes. Here we use the municipality-level map of Hungary.
   Markers are defined on the positive quadrant of a coordinate system10 where the
origin is defined as the (0, 0) km. They are placed rather close to each other (800 m)
such that the smallest municipalities have at least three points within the boundary of
the polygon that define them. In turn, the markers (we have 153,113 marker points for
the 93,030 km2 of Hungary) uniquely identify the spatial territory of a municipality.
The markers are matched to the polygon of the municipality.11
   As markers are assigned to municipalities, they make it possible to group munic-
ipalities into larger spatial units by aggregating them. If we place a grid consisting
of size L squares over the map, we can identify the markers that belong in the same
square. The square of the grid is defined by a number pair (gx , g y ). We assign each
marker to a grid square with: gx = int(x/L) + 1 and g y = int(y/L) + 1, where x and
y are the coordinates of the markers, L is the length of the side of the square, and int is
a function that takes the integer part of a number. With the coordinates of the markers
being given in km from the origin (0, 0), gx will then give the number of grid square
we need to put on the map starting from zero to arrive at the longitude of the marker
(x, y). That is, if the marker coordinates are, say, 23 and 42, then using a grid size 10,
the marker will be in the 3rd grid square from the left and the 5th from the bottom.
   As a next step, we can form a new spatial unit by joining municipalities whose
points are in the same grid. If the points that define a municipality belong to several
grids, then the municipality joins the spatial unit that holds most of its points (i.e., the
largest territory). This method gives an alternative realization of larger spatial units
anchored by the starting point (0, 0).
   Importantly, the size-L grid could be placed on the map at random locations, yielding
different versions of grid. This feature will be used later to generate a set of grids
allowing for drawing a distribution of regression model estimates.



3.2 Defining grid sizes

To analyze the role of size and administrative units, we create grids in three sizes:
small, medium and large. Small grids are 15 km × 15 km, and it takes roughly 440 of
such squares to cover the country. This is the size that fits the top 1% of municipalities
(mostly large cities such as Szeged, Nyíregyhaza or Miskolc). By aggregating small
villages and keeping large cities as they are, a realization with grid size of 15 km


10 Mercator WGS84 EPSG:41001 projection.
11 Polygon matching can be done in a GIS mapping software; we used Mapinfo. In Fig. 9 in appendix,
they are illustrated by using a small part of southwest Hungary close to the Croatian border.


123
Grid and shake: Spatial aggregation and the robustness of…                                           151




Fig. 2 A realization of 26 × 26 km units




produces a spatial division simulating a case when municipalities were the same size
as large cities.12
   The medium-sized grid is made up of 26 × 26 km2 . We chose this size to match the
number of micro-regions, i.e., 150. This is apparent from Table 3 which summarizes
the area and count the data for different spatial aggregations. The largest size of grid
squares in 39 × 39 to match the largest (the average of top 5) micro-regions. This will
allow us to simulate what would happen if all micro-regions were equally sized and
as large as the largest ones Hungary has. Figure 2 illustrates a realization of the grid
based on 26 × 26 km sized spatial units.
   To have a better sense of how aggregation works, we took one grid and calculated
the number of municipalities per grid. Figure 3 shows the distribution of the number of
municipalities for both NUTS4 micro-region level and the artificial grid. As we argued
earlier, Hungarian municipality sizes vary a great deal, moreover, non-randomly, hence
the deviation. About 30% of the units contain only a few number of units (no more
than 10), while about 25% include many (31+). Note that as the graph suggests, the
distribution of the number of municipalities per unit (both when considering the first
realization and the average 300 permutations) matched fairly closely that of NUTS4
regions.
   Having these three artificial grids of sizes, with 15 × 15 km, 26 × 26 km, 39 × 39 km
squares, we can now easily compare the spatial features of relationships, such as the
spatial magnitude of agglomeration spillovers.



12 This approach would in some way, mimic the Swedish example, where 290 municipalities have been
defined with a minimum population requirement, yielding similarly sized areas—except for the large Nordic
regions.


                                                                                            123
152                                                                                  G. Békés, P. Harasztosi




Fig. 3 Distribution of units that include few and many municipalities



3.3 Border correction

A disadvantage of the method described above is that small areas are likely to get
drawn by the border. To partially offset this, we considered all areas (created by the
grid) that are smaller than a pre-determined threshold (set as 10% of L × L km)
and added it to a randomly chosen neighboring region. This border issue is more
important for small countries/larger grid units and with relatively more zigzagging or
just non-horizontal/vertical border line features.13


3.4 Randomization

The most problematic aspect of both any given administrative regional setting and the
artificial grid we propose is the arbitrary boundaries of units. When considering the
robustness or validity of the results at a certain level aggregation or finding out about the
importance of administrative units, the choice of spatial units may be important. As we
will show later, two randomly placed grids may often yield rather different outcomes.
To treat this arbitrary nature, we will randomly generate 300 possible grids—by first
placing a grid of L × L km sized units and then “shaking it” over the map to yield
different sets of aggregations.
   The procedure works as follows. We select a random staring point by adding inde-
pendently drawn random numbers ξ and ζ to the (0, 0) starting point which are
uniformly distributed over the 0 to L interval. Then, using the algorithm described
in Sect. 3.2, we assign markers to L × L km sided grid square. The bundle of munic-
ipalities included in any new grid unit will be different from the one defined by the


13 This is illustrated in the left panel of Fig. 10 in “Appendix” section, where the random grid joins only
three municipalities at the border, including Őrtilos, Zákány, Surd and Mezőkeresztúr. The right panel of
Fig. 10 shows the adjusted spatial units. In this case, the four municipalities are added to the larger region
to the east, hence increasing its size.


123
Grid and shake: Spatial aggregation and the robustness of…                                              153


starting point (0, 0). It is worth noting that picking random numbers from (0,L) is
enough as ξ + L and ζ + L would yield the same realization as ξ and ζ .
   In the first step of the procedure, we assign a grid (a pair of numbers) to each point
so that we get each municipality to belong to a specific unit in the grid. We carry out
border corrections when necessary. In the second step, the randomized grid placement
is repeated a thousand times. Third, we open a spatial structure, calculate several
variables of interest and run regressions and save the outcome. Fourth, we collect
estimated coefficients, generate the distributions and draw conclusions. Finally, we
take these saved coefficients and consider the distribution at various grid sizes, with
L = 15 km, 26 km, 39 km.


4 Empirical applications and discussion of results

In this section, we present two empirical applications and show the procedure in action.
We present the details of the Hungarian data we employ and introduce two topics that
use regionally aggregated data. We start by looking at how wages are correlated with
density followed by looking at how agglomeration may be correlated with bolder
entrepreneurship measured by new firm formation. For both of these cases, we use the
artificial grid method to understand differences in various measures of agglomeration.
This is followed by a discussion of external validity of our observations and finally, a
comparison of insights with lessons from existing methods.


4.1 Data

We use Hungarian firm-level balance sheet data from the Central Statistical Office to
obtain firm-level information and resort to information from 1999 for the cross section
OLS. Firms include all double accounting manufacturing companies with at least five
employees. We have the same information for 1998 as well, allowing us to create
variables for new firm formation. Firm-level financial data are matched with location
information at municipal level.14 Firm-level data are then matched with municipality-
level information on municipality size and population from the T-STAR database.
   Wages are calculated from balance sheet data using additional information on full
time employees and total wage cost. The proxy for human capital is obtained from
the Hungarian Labor Force Survey (HLFS). The survey contains a sample of workers
in the manufacturing industries and documents various employee characteristics. The
information includes their highest educational attainment, which is used here as a proxy
for human capital. The data connect workers to municipalities; however, their actual
employers are not identified, which prevents linking the firm-level information with
worker data. Using the HLFS sample, the municipality-level average of the highest
grade of schooling variable can be calculated to serve as the proxy for the quality of

14 Unfortunately, we only know about headquarters. However, this is not a major problem for manufacturing
firms in Hungary: in their appendix, Békés and Harasztosi (2013) showed that only 7% of firms have multiple
sites and that, on average, these firms have 1.15 plants. This may give rise to a relatively small potential
bias only.


                                                                                               123
154                                                                                   G. Békés, P. Harasztosi


the labor force. This human capital proxy shows a considerable variation from 7 to 14
years of education attained.15


4.2 Two models: wage and firm formation elasticity of agglomeration

One key evidence in the economic geography literature is that firms operating in
more densely populated areas show higher productivity and also pay higher wages.
The positive correlation between density and productivity stems from both natural
advantages and externalities that boost productivity as was first described by Marshall
(1920). The Marshallian externalities play an important role in the micro-founded
explanations for growth, innovation and trade theory, and understanding their strength
is important in order to evaluate economic policies that, for example, aim at cluster
formation or at helping backward EU regions to close the gap with more developed
regions. Typically, the literature finds that, on average, productivity of firms located
in a region with 10% larger population tends to be 0.4–1.2% higher, and this higher
productivity will then be equally translated into higher local wages. For a thorough
meta-analysis on results, see Melo et al. (2009).
    In our exercise, we opt for considering wage as the dependent variable, as this is the
most widely investigated relationship and hence allows for international comparisons.
We estimated the agglomeration effect on the average municipality wage:

                           Wagei = β1 DENSITYi + β2 EDUCi + νi                                             (1)

where i is the index of the spatial unit, W age is the average wage of employees,
DENSITY is the density of working age population in the municipality, and EDUC is
a proxy for education levels. This is estimated with OLS on a cross section of 1999
data, with all variables used in logs.
   The results are presented in Table 1; the first two columns show regression results
on actual administrative (municipal and micro-regional) units, and columns (3) to (5)
show results on the artificial grids of 15×15, 26×26 and the 39×39 grid, respectively.
For all artificial grids we display the mean of estimated standard errors followed by
the standard deviation of the estimated coefficient.
   The table suggest that at all estimation levels, there is a positive correlation between
the average wage in an area and its density (size of population holding area size
constant). The estimated coefficient is lowest when using municipal-level data (5.5%),
followed by small artificial units (7.7%), while the estimate for micro-region and
medium-sized artificial units (11.8%, 12.7%) is about double the size of the municipal-
level estimate. Having artificial units allows us to compare these figures attaching
statistical significance to any gaps we may find, and we will discuss the comparisons
in Sect. 5.

15 Note that the variables are recalculated on different spatial aggregation levels and artificial spatial
units by recalculation and using frequency weights. For example, if the average year of schooling (ys) in
municipality i is ysi calculated over n i individuals, then the average year of schooling for spatial unit that
includes municipalities i and j will be (ysi × n i + ys j × n j )/(n 1 + n j ).


123
Grid and shake: Spatial aggregation and the robustness of…                                                  155


Table 1 Wage regressions

Administrative units                                       Artificial grid units
Units              (1)                (2)                                      (3)           (4)          (5)
                   Municipal          Micro-region                             km15          km26         km39

Density            0.055              0.128                Density             0.082         0.116        0.137
SE                 0.007              0.021                (mean) SE           0.011         0.019        0.026
                                                           SD coeff.           0.006         0.008        0.015
School yrs.        0.966              0.820                School yrs.         1.098         1.123        0.979
SE                 0.041              0.355                (mean) SE           0.169         0.442        0.664
                                                           SD coeff.           0.121         0.219        0.510
                                                           Replication         300           300          300
Obs.               2872               149                  Obs                 437           150          73
R-squared          0.244              0.383                R-squared           0.240         0.361        0.393

All variables are in logs. Density is the size of local working age population divided by the area in km2 .
Years of schooling is average of local population. Robust standard errors are displayed. In grid models we
report two statistics for standard errors: (mean) SE is the mean of robust standard error of the coefficient over
300 replications, while the SD coefficient provides the statistic for the standard deviation of the coefficient
itself calculated over 300 replications



   Note that in municipality-level regression the number of observations is 2873. This
is smaller than the total number of municipalities (3125) as there are municipalities
without any identifiable manufacturing activity. This is an important reason behind
the use of some aggregation technique, especially in a highly fragmented country with
unequally sized units.16
   As our second topic, we will consider new firm formation (or entrepreneurship)
as an example of a process with great spatial variation. Regional variation in new
firm formation has been amply studied. Key explanatory variables include mea-
sures of unemployment, population density, industrial restructuring, and availability
of financing (Armington and Ács 2002), income as well as market dynamics such
as exits and change in industrial structure (Sutaria and Hicks 2004). Infrastructure,
such as motorways, may also affect firm entry and location (Holl 2004). In a close
exercise to ours, Amrhein and Flowerdew (1992) use a Poisson model to analyze
labor movement. Since policy interventions enhancing entrepreneurship abound at
local as well as regional levels, the evidence from such exercises may have policy
implications as they can answer questions about the usefulness of regional policies
and grants offered by regional authorities. We can test whether regional boundaries
matter by investigating whether the policy impact is bounded by administrative unit
lines.


16 This selection issue might affect the comparison between municipalities and 15 km grids because the
latter will include the areas of zero employment areas in the denominator of the density measure, but it does
not affect grids of larger sizes, like the 26 and 36 km grids. The sign of the bias caused by the selection
is ambiguous and is an issue in the western part of Hungary, owing to the highly fragmented municipality
structure.


                                                                                                     123
156                                                                                      G. Békés, P. Harasztosi


Table 2 Entry regressions

Administrative units                                     Artificial grid units
Units            (1)               (2)                                           (3)         (4)          (5)
                 Municipal         Micro-region                                  15 km       26 km        39 km

Density          1.377             0.917                 Density                 1.321       1.257        1.146
SE               0.079             0.172                 (mean) SE               0.074       0.096        0.219
                                                         SD coeff.               0.027       0.039        0.085
Wage             0.608             0.554                 Wage                    0.526       0.392        1.664
SE               0.200             0.716                 (mean) SE               0.266       0.392        0.654
                                                         SD coeff.               0.110       0.152        0.358
                                                         Replication             300         300          300
Obs.             2872              149                   Obs                     437         150          73
R-squared        0.467             0.379                 Ps. R-squared           0.605       0.615        0.614

All variables are in logs. Density is the size of local working age population divided by the area in km2 .
Years of schooling is average of local population. Robust standard errors are displayed. In grid models we
report two statistics for standard errors: (mean) SE is the mean of robust standard error of the coefficient over
300 replications, while the SD coefficient provides the statistic for the standard deviation of the coefficient
itself calculated over 300 replications



   Here we estimate a Poisson model, where we regress the number of new firms on
population density and labor market conditions proxied by wages. Our variable in
focus is once again density captured by the population of the area.

                                 Pr (yi = N ) = f (λi )
                                      λi = β1 DENSITYi + β2 Wagei                                              (2)

   Results are presented in Table 2, with columns (1) and (2) reporting results on
administrative and columns (3)–(5) on artificial units. Estimated coefficients of the
population coefficient are greater than unity, suggesting a net positive relationship
between population and firm formation.


4.3 Grid and shake in action

In this subsection our aim is show what kind of statements are possible with the use
of the grid and shake method. To do this, we will rely on estimated agglomeration
elasticities from the two exercises presented earlier. Estimates are shown regarding
two types of administrative units (municipalities and micro-regions) and three artificial
grids, made up of 15 × 15 km, 26 × 26 km and 39 × 39 km units. For all artificial
grids, we generated 300 replications—regressions were repeated 300 times, yielding
a distribution of elasticities. To demonstrate our points, we devised four graphs with
distributions of estimated coefficients. Figures 4 and 5 depict elasticities for the first
example on density and wage, while Figs. 6 and 7 show them for the second one with
firm entry and density.

123
Grid and shake: Spatial aggregation and the robustness of…                                                 157




Fig. 4 Agglomeration externality—administrative versus artificial units. This figure shows the coefficient
estimate on population in Model 1 (agglomeration elasticity of wage). The thick blue (solid) vertical line
gives the point estimate for the municipality estimate. The thin blue (solid) line gives the distribution of
point estimates over 300 point estimates on the 15×15 grid. The thick red (dash) vertical line gives the point
estimate for the micro-region estimate. The thin red (dash) line gives the distribution of point estimates over
300 point estimates on the 26 × 26 grid. The very thin dashed lines are 5% confidentiality thresholds


   In what follows, we discuss three applications: (i) the role of fragmentation com-
paring municipalities with a grid simulating average city sized units (15 × 15 km); (ii)
looking at the impact of the size of units, comparing three grid sizes; and (iii) the role
of administration by comparing micro-regions with artificial units sized 26 × 26 km
that match the average size of micro-regions.

4.3.1 Fragmentation of municipalities

Hungary has a rather fragmented municipal system with 3125 local units for 10 mil-
lion inhabitants. For the similarly populous (but much larger) Sweden, we find 290
municipalities, Portugal has 309, while Austria has 2300—the highest number for
medium-sized countries.
   The first application is hence related to a lower level of public administration, as
we investigate how this fragmentation may affect the estimated relationship between
agglomeration and wages as well as new firm formation. To demonstrate this we can
now compare regression results at the municipal level with estimated elasticities from
regressions on the 15 × 15 km grid. For instance, such a set of results would allow
comparisons with model estimates regarding other countries with less fragmented
systems.
   In this dataset, fragmentation of the local political-administrative unit implies that
locally estimated agglomeration elasticities are different to what they would be in the
case of artificially aggregating small units, namely creating (on average) 440 artificial
units instead of actual municipalities.




                                                                                                 123
158                                                                                  G. Békés, P. Harasztosi




Fig. 5 Agglomeration elasticities at various grid sizes. This figure shows the coefficient estimate on popu-
lation in Model 1 (agglomeration elasticity of wage) over various grid sizes. The blue (solid) line gives the
distribution of the coefficient over 300 estimations on the grid size of 15 × 15 km. The red (short dash) line
gives the distribution of the coefficient over 300 estimations on the grid size 26 × 26 km. The green (long
dash) line gives the distribution of the coefficient over 300 estimations on the grid size of 39 × 39 km




   For both the wage OLS and the firm entry Poisson regressions, we find that the
estimated elasticity for the municipal level is lower than the 95% of elasticities calcu-
lated using artificial units, see blue (solid) lines in both Figs. 4 and 6. The difference
is particularly strong for the wage regressions: the estimated elasticity is 5.2 at the
municipal level and is lower than the 95% lower bound of 6.6 of the 15 × 15 km sized
artificial unit level.
   Importantly, this means that, purely for methodological reasons, estimations car-
ried out at the same nomenclature (NUTS5—municipalities) in countries with larger
administrative units (like Sweden or Portugal) are likely to be above the one we
obtained for Hungary (or those that may be estimated in Austria).



4.3.2 The size of spatial units

The second issue is related to the size of units of observations by comparing results
from grids of 15 × 15 km, 26 × 26 km and the 39 × 39 km sized units. Figure 5 shows
the population elasticities at various levels of grid size for our example 1 (wages) and
Fig. 7 plots results obtained from example 2 (firm entry).
   As for wages, we find that the population elasticity is different at 15 × 15 km and
26 × 26 km size, but not beyond. (Note that as suggested by Table 1, the relationship
with years of schooling varies between 26 × 26 km and 39 × 39 km unit sizes.)
Regarding firm entry, point estimates suggest that elasticities are different for the
39 × 39 km grid from the other two, but given the larger variation of estimates, these
are not statistically different. The possibility of establishing such arguments is the
main reason behind our randomization method (However, as shown in Table 2, the

123
Grid and shake: Spatial aggregation and the robustness of…                                                   159




Fig. 6 Agglomeration externality—administrative versus artificial units. This figure shows the coefficient
estimate on population in Model 2 (agglomeration elasticity of firm formation). The thick blue (solid) line
gives the point estimate for the municipality estimate. The thin blue (solid) vertical line gives the distribution
of point estimates over 300 point estimates on the 15 × 15 grid. The thick red (dash) vertical line gives the
point estimate for the micro-region estimate. The thin red (dash) line gives the distribution of point estimates
over 300 point estimates on the 26 × 26 grid. The very thin dashed lines represent the 5% confidentiality
thresholds



elasticity of wage level on firm entry on the large grids is statistically different). These
results broadly conform with estimates found earlier.17

4.3.3 The role of political-administrative division

As final application, we now consider the role of administrative units by comparing
elasticities measured at the micro-region level with a grid of 26 × 26 km sized units.
Table 1 shows that for model 1 (wage regressed on population), we find an estimated
coefficient of 12.7% for the micro-regions, and this may be compared with the mean
estimated coefficient of 11.8%—averaged out on the 300 replication of the 26 km
grid. Figure 4 depicts this with dashed lines, suggesting that while there may be a
small difference, the estimated coefficient of the administrative unit is not statistically
significant as compared to the artificial set of results. Hence, we cannot reject the null
of zero effect of administrative units of micro-regions compared to the artificial units
of equal average size (26 × 26 km).
   The story is somewhat different when we consider firm entry (Fig. 6). All estimated
coefficients are significantly greater than unity. However, the equality of estimated
coefficients is here rejected at 5% confidence level, suggesting that there is a small,
but statistically significant difference between elasticities at artificial units compared

17 Comparing them with the results presented by Briant et al. (2010) using a different aggregation method-
ology, we find that the order of elasticities is different. In this paper, we find coefficients rising with size,
but a significant difference can only be established between small- and medium-sized units. Briant et al.
(2010) found no linear relations, and the difference was only between their medium- and large-sized units.


                                                                                                    123
160                                                                                  G. Békés, P. Harasztosi




Fig. 7 Agglomeration elasticities at various grid sizes. This figure shows the coefficient estimate on popu-
lation in Model 2 (agglomeration elasticity of firm formation) over various grid sizes. The blue (solid) line
gives the distribution of coefficient over 300 estimations on the grid size 15 × 15 km. The red (short dash)
line gives the distribution of coefficient over 300 estimations on the grid size 26 × 26 km. The green (long
dash) line gives the distribution of coefficient over 300 estimations on the grid size 39 × 39 km




Fig. 8 Frequency of a municipality being included in a circle and its mean wage. The number of circles is
created by first calculating for each municipality the number of circles this municipality is included in, and
then grouping them by this count. Average wage is calculated for groups of municipalities based on this
count as well




to administrative regions. Note that estimates at different artificial units vary more
than earlier, and tails are longer, too, as depicted in Fig. 7.
   This suggests that finding statistical difference depends on the nature of the exercise.
In our case, we found that elasticity of population density is lower at the administrative
unit—compared to similarly sized artificial units. Thus, it is possible that some policy
might have been in play here.

123
Grid and shake: Spatial aggregation and the robustness of…                            161


4.4 Generalization—outside validity

To generalize our results, we test the null hypothesis that administrative borders do not
matter in countries represented by our Hungarian data. Viewed this way, the coefficient
estimates from our data, including the estimates from each of the 300 Grid and Shake
permutations, are just one realization from their respective distributions. The entire
distribution of potential point estimates under this null hypothesis is therefore an all-
encompassing distribution of the coefficient estimates across all permutations. The
question is then the extent to which the distribution of the coefficient estimates with
the true administrative boundaries overlaps with this all-encompassing distribution.
An intuitive comparison suggests that we can reject the null hypothesis if the two
distributions are different from each other.
    To estimate the encompassing distribution across all permutations we took a numer-
ical approach. In each permutation we took 50 random points from the coefficient
distribution implied by the point estimate and the standard error, assuming a normal
distribution. The all-encompassing distribution is then estimated by the empirical dis-
tribution of these 300 × 50 coefficients. The distribution implied by the administrative
boundaries is simulated numerically in the same fashion, with 50 points drawn ran-
domly from the normal distribution around the point estimate with the standard error
estimate. The original and this extended distribution are shown in Fig. 12 in “Appendix”
section. Looking at this graph as well as results of the two-sided Kolmogorov–Smirnov
test, a systematic test of the equality of the two distributions, we now cannot reject the
null hypothesis.18
    In addition to comparing a point estimate of the administrative unit to the distri-
bution of estimates of an equally sized artificial grid, this procedure also allows for
a comparison of distributions by two differently sized units. To illustrate both these
approaches, we created a chart denoting means and 90 and 95% confidence intervals
for both administrative classifications and simulated distributions with a single 300
replications (as in Fig. 4) and 50 × 300 replications as in Fig. 12. The graphs 13
hence shows six lines, each with symbols denoting confidence intervals. In addition
to the previous observation, we see that administrative versus artificial grid estimates
now cannot be told apart not only for the micro-region but also for the municipal-
ities. Furthermore, now the difference between the estimates from the two artificial
grids is not significantly different from zero. This suggests that our particular find-
ing on the difference between differently sized regions is just indicative for other
countries.


4.5 Comparison with other methods

Finally, let us compare this method with some existing methods. In particular, we will
discuss issues with aggregating units by drawing a circle around observations and
discuss differences with respect to the method proposed by Briant et al. (2010).


18 KS results are available on request.



                                                                               123
162                                                                   G. Békés, P. Harasztosi


   The most basic method is aggregating units (markets) within a circle with a given
radius around an observation. For instance, Martin-Barroso et al. (2010) used this
method to correct for the agricultural area of municipality size when estimating
agglomeration elasticities. This simple spatial aggregator function method assumes
that we are uncertain about the market size or the extension of some externality and
consider access to be symmetric around the observation. In this process, we set up
circles around each observation and aggregate units. The advantage of this method is
simplicity and flexibility regarding spatial unit size.
   The disadvantage is a bias introduced by the oversampling of areas composed of
many small municipalities. To better see this, we look at how the circles method would
work in Hungary. There are 3125 municipalities, so we create 3125 circles with a center
located in each of these municipalities. The circles have a radius of 14 km so that its
area would match the average size of NUTS4 regions as well as the average area of
the size of our grid of 26 × 26 km. For each municipality, we calculate the average
wage, as well as count the number of circles the municipality is included in. In the
case of Hungary, we find a correlation: richer municipalities tend to be counted less
frequently on average than poorer ones, thus biasing estimates, see Fig. 8. This does
not happen when estimates are based on disjoint areas, where all municipalities are
counted only once.
   Spatial dynamic or distributed lags models have also been used to capture the
potential correlation of the independent variable across space. For instance, Cainelli
et al. (2014) analyzed firm exits as a function of agglomeration and used neighboring
Italian regions in a dynamic panel model estimated by GMM. Similarly to our model,
this allows the testing of decay over space. However, the number of neighbors will be
determined independently of the size of adjacent units.
   Our approach of creating spatial districts is closest to the “dots-to-boxes” (DtB)
procedure developed by Briant et al. (2010), who investigate the effects of MAUP
on inferences using French administrative units, and applying two approaches. First,
they place a grid over France which creates the same number (N) of new spatial units
as the one they wish to compare it to. This creates square-shaped units with only
one realization. Second, to match the numbers of existing administrative units, they
randomly pick basic units of the same number (N) and merge them with neighboring
units. This procedure results in differently shaped and sized N spatial units depending
on which seeds are chosen and on the sequence how neighboring units are added. The
size also depends on the spatial distribution of the size of the basic units. A similar
method to the DtB approach is used by Menon (2012), who also creates artificial spatial
units and does a simulation exercise keeping the size distribution of the administrative
units fixed. While he aims at recreating a size distribution, we simulate how elasticities
would change should unit size change—while keeping units equally sized in one
go.
   The size distribution of the basic units will influence the size of the created spa-
tial units. In France, due to the roughly equal size of basic spatial units, this is not
a problem. However, the same method would not be entirely satisfactory in the case
of Hungary or for NUTS regions in the European Union. Consequently, our method
is an alternative to that of Briant et al. (2010) and can be applied to countries or
federations with basic spatial units that are rather heterogeneous in size and still can

123
Grid and shake: Spatial aggregation and the robustness of…                                                   163


test robustness. To this end, we repeated our core exercise (Fig. 4) now applying
the method used in Briant et al. (2010). The lower panel of Fig. 14 in “Appendix”
section shows a map with artificial units this time created by the DtB algorithm.
Seeds were fixed to generate 150 units to match our core grid of artificial units
depicted in the upper panel of the same figure. There are two key observations to
make when comparing these two graphs. First, while in some areas the units are
similar (North–East), in many instances, there is a great deal of variation in size
and form. Second, as expected, DtB will generate small (south–west) and large
(center–east) units owing to a large variation in Hungarian municipality unit size.
For instance, our model generated 93 units west of the Danube, while DtB generated
57 units.19
   To gain further insight, we reproduced Fig. 15 now also depicting the distribution
of coefficients by the Briant et al. (2010) method. We can see that the median point
estimate is somewhat lower, and more importantly, the standard deviation is much
higher (0.7 vs 1.4%). Both of these features may be the consequence of unequally
aggregated spatial units (municipalities). For the same figure, we also reproduced
results using the Circle method, using a circle with a radius of 14 km (to match
the 26 × 26 km artificial grid size). Unlike for the DtB, this generates a single
coefficient estimate that can be compared to the distribution. It is smaller than the
micro-region point estimate, but both are in confidence interval of our core esti-
mate.


5 Conclusions and practical applications

In this paper, we proposed a flexible, transparent, simple and relatively fast20 method
to test the robustness of empirical investigations at various levels of spatially aggre-
gated data. In its ability to generate a distribution of estimated parameters (such as
agglomeration elasticities), it is an alternative to Briant et al. (2010), while in terms
of taking distance seriously, it is an alternative of using weighted spatial lags.
   Our method is applicable for researchers and practitioners as long as their data are
naturally coded at some low administrative level, such as a municipality or a ZIP code.
The method is most suited to be used under some fairly broad conditions:
1. Variables of the analysis that typically make sense at some spatial (regional) unit
   (for example, consider variables like the number of hospital beds, doctors, univer-
   sity classes).
2. The analysis involves processes that are not constrained within a single spatial
   unit, such as spatial spillover effects (for example, knowledge flows are diffused
   over space).

19 Also, the DtB method generates a variety of “shapes,” but importantly, they show that this feature does
not matter.
20 The method is simple: once the map is digitized, it is fast and may be modified easily. One additional
difference is the speed of calculating robustness measures; our code is substantially faster. In lack of available
codes, we coded the Briant et al. (2010) method ourselves. On a laptop, our code run was about 10–20 times
faster.


                                                                                                    123
164                                                                      G. Békés, P. Harasztosi


3. Regions are not defined by first geography separators (for example, seas and moun-
   tains do not prevent transport and knowledge flows).
4. Building block spatial units are heterogeneous—and the average size of units is
   correlated with some unobserved feature (for example, the size of the Benelux and
   Spanish regions differs greatly and this difference is correlated with socioeconomic
   factors such as urbanization).
   We believe that our method is an improvement on existing ones such as spatial
lags (SL), DtB by Briant et al. (2010), added area under fixed radius circles (circles),
while bringing together some advantages of these approaches. Our approach ends
up comparing equally sized units thus avoiding bias from the endogeneity of spatial
structure (i.e., concentration of small units in particular areas). This is true for the
circles model, but both SL and DtB add units rather than distance. Importantly, our
method counts all units only once and hence does not oversample dense areas with
many small units (such as Circles). While it improves some SL models as well, it
is less flexible in modeling nonlinear relationships within units. Apparently, it is a
better method when spatial units are of different size in a non-random fashion. Other
methods, for example Briant et al. (2010), disregard unit area size. In this respect,
distance-weighted SL and circles are similar to our approach.
   The advantages of our method have several practical applications. In particular,
we showed that the size of artificial grid units does matter in the measurement of the
agglomeration premium. Such information is useful when we aim to compare estimates
calculated for various datasets in different parts of the world. We also showed that the
method may be used to test the impact of policies by comparing actual and pseudo-
administrative units. In our case, regional boundaries had no impact on the wage
elasticity of density.

6 Appendix

See Table 3. See Figs. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15.


Table 3 Summary of
                                          N umber o f units   Area km2
Hungarian administrative spatial
units and grids                                               Mean        Min          Max

                                   Municipality       3125      29.55       0.71         483.22
                                   15 km grid          440     210.37       1.52         607.21
Hungarian municipalities are
NUTS5-level units, and micro-      Micro-region        150     620.23     103.08       1573.10
regions are NUTS4-level units      26 km grid          150     605.35      67.61       1146.01
Figures for grids are averages     39 km grid           75    1235.50     152.20       2060.82
over 300 replications




123
Grid and shake: Spatial aggregation and the robustness of…     165




Fig. 9 Markers serve as basic elements to be shaken




                                                             123
166                                                                             G. Békés, P. Harasztosi




                     (a)                                                  (b)
Fig. 10 Adjustment for small areas near the border: 26 × 26 km. a Before adjustment. b After adjustment




Fig. 11 Population density in European regions




123
Grid and shake: Spatial aggregation and the robustness of…                                                  167




Fig. 12 Additional SD. This figure shows the distribution of estimated coefficients on population in Model
1—agglomeration elasticity of wage—(blue line) as well as an extended distribution (red dashed line).
The extended distribution takes into account the uncertainty of each elasticity estimate:βikm26 where i =
{1 . . . 300}. For each, we randomly draw 50 coefficients from normal distribution N (βikm26 ,σikm26 ). All
together red dashed line is a density over 50 × 300 elasticity value




Fig. 13 Additional SD2. This figure shows the distribution boxplots for population coefficient estimates in
Model 1 (agglomeration elasticity of wage) produced by various approaches. These are from top to bottom:
(1) elasticity estimate using municipality-level data, confidence intervals are calculated using the standard
deviation estimates of the elasticity. (2) Estimates on grids using km15 sizes, confidence interval is created
using the deviation from the 300 estimates. (3) Estimates on grids using km15 sizes, confidence interval
takes into account estimation uncertainty of each of the 300 estimates by adding 50 random normal draws:
N (βikm15 , σikm15 ). (4) Elasticity estimate using micro-region-level data, confidence intervals are calculated
using the standard deviation estimates of the elasticity. (5) Estimates on grids using km26 sizes, confidence
interval is created using the deviation from the 300 estimates. (6) Estimates on grids using km26 sizes,
confidence interval takes into account estimation uncertainty of each of the 300 estimates by adding 50
random normal draws: N (βikm26 , σikm26 )




                                                                                                  123
168                                                                            G. Békés, P. Harasztosi




Fig. 14 A realization of 26 × 26 km units (above) and 150 seeded DtB (below)




123
Grid and shake: Spatial aggregation and the robustness of…                                                169




Fig. 15 Comparison to dots-to-boxes results. This figure shows the exact replication of Fig. 4, and it addi-
tionally displays DtB results too. It shows the coefficient estimate on population in Model 1 (agglomeration
elasticity of wage). The thick blue (solid) line gives the point estimate for the municipality estimate. The
thin blue (solid) line gives the distribution of point estimates over 300 point estimates on the 15 × 15 grid.
The thick red (dashed) line gives the point estimate for the micro-region estimate. The thin red (dashed) line
gives the distribution of point estimates over 300 point estimates on the 26 × 26 grid. The very thin dashed
lines represent the 5% confidentiality thresholds. Additionally, the very thick mint-green (short dash) line
shows the distribution of point estimates over 300 realizations of Dots-to-boxes spatial arrangements using
150 seeds




References
Ács ZJ, Armington C (2004) The impact of geographic differences in human capital on service firm formation
     rates. J Urban Econ 56(2):244–278
Amrhein CG (1995) Searching for the elusive aggregation effect: evidence from statistical simulations.
     Environ Plan A 27(1):105–119
Amrhein CG, Flowerdew R (1992) The effect of data aggregation on a Poisson regression model of Canadian
     migration. Environ Plan A 24(10):1381–1391
Andersson M, Klaesson J, Larsson JP (2016) How local are spatial density externalities? Neighbourhood
     effects in agglomeration economies. Reg Stud 50(6):1082–1095
Anselin L (2010) Thirty years of spatial econometrics. Pap Reg Sci 89(1):3–25
Anselin L, Bera AK (1998) Spatial dependence in linear regression models with an introduction to spatial
     econometrics. Stat Textb Monogr 155:237–290
Armington C, Ács ZJ (2002) The determinants of regional variation in new firm formation. Reg Stud
     36(1):33–45
Bacher H, Brülhart M (2013) Progressive taxes and firm births. Int Tax Public Finance 20(1):129–168
Békés G, Harasztosi P (2013) Agglomeration premium and trading activity of firms. Reg Sci Urban Econ
     43(1):51–64
Briant A, Combes PP, Lafourcade M (2010) Dots to boxes: do the size and shape of spatial units jeopardize
     economic geography estimations? J Urban Econ 67(3):287–302
Burger MJ, van Oort FG, van der Knaap B (2010) A treatise on the geographical scale of agglomeration
     externalities and the MAUP. Sci Reg 9(1):19–39
Cainelli G, Montresor S, Vittucci Marzetti G (2014) Spatial agglomeration and firm exit: a spatial dynamic
     analysis for italian provinces. Small Bus Econ 43(1):213–228
Ciccone A, Hall RE (1996) Productivity and the density of economic activity. Am Econ Rev 86(1):54–70
Devereux MP, Griffith R, Simpson H (2007) Firm location decisions, regional grants and agglomeration
     externalities. J Public Econ 91(3–4):413–435
Dewhurst J, McCann P (2007) Specialisation and regional size. Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, pp 204–220


                                                                                                 123
170                                                                                G. Békés, P. Harasztosi


Dubé J, Brunelle C (2014) Dots to dots: a general methodology to build local indicators using spatial
     micro-data. Ann Reg Sci 53(1):245–272
Duranton G, Overman HG (2008) Exploring the detailed location patterns of U.K. manufacturing industries
     using microgeographic data. J Reg Sci 48(1):213–243
Fotheringham AS, Wong DS (1991) The modifiable areal unit problem in multivariate statistical analysis.
     Environ Plan 23(7):1025–1044
Gobillon L, Milcent C (2013) Spatial disparities in hospital performance. J Econ Geogr 13(6):1013–1040
Holl A (2004) Transport infrastructure, agglomeration economies, and firm birth: empirical evidence from
     Portugal. J Reg Sci 44(4):693–712
Hortaçsu A, Syverson C (2007) Cementing relationships: vertical integration, foreclosure, productivity, and
     prices. J Polit Econ 115:250–301
Iyer G, Seetharaman P (2008) Too close to be similar: product and price competition in retail gasoline
     markets. Quant Mark Econ 6(3):205–234
Larsson J (2014) The neighborhood or the region? Reassessing the density-wage relationship using geocoded
     data. Ann Reg Sci 52(2):367–384
Lychagin S, Pinkse J, Slade ME, Reenen JV (2010) Spillovers in space: does geography matter? NBER
     working papers 16188, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc
Marshall A (1920) Principles of economics. Prometheus Books, New York
Martin-Barroso D, Nunez Serrano JA, Velazquez FJ (2010) A different look at agglomeration effects in
     Spain. MPRA Paper 33601. University Library of Munich, Germany
Melo PC, Graham DJ, Noland RB (2009) A meta-analysis of estimates of urban agglomeration economies.
     Reg Sci Urban Econ 39(3):332–342
Menon C (2012) The bright side of MAUP: defining new measures of industrial agglomeration. Pap Reg
     Sci 91(1):3–28
Rosenthal SS, Strange WC (2008) The attenuation of human capital spillovers. J Urban Econ 64(2):373–389
Sutaria V, Hicks DA (2004) New firm formation: dynamics and determinants. Ann Reg Sci 38(2):241–262




123
