[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: journal/B25-xiong-yang-2023-the-identification-and-dynamics-of-urban-shadow-areas-from-the-perspective-of-people-flows-a-case-study-of-nanjing-10.3390-buildings13122934.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Title:           The Identification and Dynamics of Urban Shadow Areas from the Perspective of People Flows—A Case Study of Nanjing
Subject:         Urban shadow areas, formed by long-term unbalanced and inadequate development during the rapid process of urbanization, are of great significance to a city’s overall development. However, relatively little attention has been paid to identifying and characterizing urban shadow areas. Drawing upon a dataset on urban morphology and cellular signaling, and taking Nanjing as a case study, this paper proposes a method to identify urban shadow areas from the perspective of people flows. The empirical results show that there are 19 urban shadow areas within the downtown areas of Nanjing, 11 of which are distributed in the old downtown areas and the rest are relatively scattered in the periphery. As for morphological characteristics, these urban shadow areas differ from each other in terms of indicators such as building density and development intensity. Moreover, the empirical results show that these urban shadow areas are not isolated but closely connected with other parts of Nanjing. Based on the different spatio-temporal distribution patterns of their connections, the 19 urban shadow areas are divided into four types, and the characteristics of each type have been investigated by analyzing a representative shadow area. It is suggested that policies aiming to eliminate the negative effects of urban shadow areas should consider heterogeneity in their spatial distributions within a city, the temporal distribution of their external connections, and their dominant functions.
Keywords:        urban shadow area; people flow; cellular signaling data; urban morphology; Nanjing
Author:          Weiting Xiong and Junyan Yang
Creator:         LaTeX with hyperref
Producer:        GPL Ghostscript 9.55.0
CreationDate:    Sat Jul 11 18:27:32 2026 WIB
ModDate:         Sat Jul 11 18:27:32 2026 WIB
Custom Metadata: no
Metadata Stream: yes
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            none
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           20
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       595 x 842 pts (A4)
Page rot:        0
File size:       3901755 bytes
Optimized:       no
PDF version:     1.7
[Extracted Text]
                                                                                       3.4        5.6




Article


The Identification and Dynamics of
Urban Shadow Areas from the
Perspective of People Flows—A
Case Study of Nanjing

Weiting Xiong and Junyan Yang




Special Issue
Inclusion, Safety, and Resilience in the Construction Industry
Edited by
Dr. Sainan Lyu, Dr. Jingyu Yu, Dr. Beibei Zhang, Dr. Xiaoyan Jiang and Dr. Peng Cui




                                                                 https://doi.org/10.3390/buildings13122934
            buildings
Article
The Identification and Dynamics of Urban Shadow
Areas from the Perspective of People Flows—A Case Study
of Nanjing
Weiting Xiong 1, * and Junyan Yang 2

                                         1   Department of Urban Planning, College of Landscape Architecture, Nanjing Forestry University,
                                             No. 159 Longpan Road, Nanjing 210037, China
                                         2   Department of Urban Planning, School of Architecture, Southeast University, No. 2 Sipailou, Nanjing 210096,
                                             China; yjy312@126.com
                                         *   Correspondence: xwt@njfu.edu.cn


                                         Abstract: Urban shadow areas, formed by long-term unbalanced and inadequate development
                                         during the rapid process of urbanization, are of great significance to a city’s overall development.
                                         However, relatively little attention has been paid to identifying and characterizing urban shadow
                                         areas. Drawing upon a dataset on urban morphology and cellular signaling, and taking Nanjing as
                                         a case study, this paper proposes a method to identify urban shadow areas from the perspective of
                                         people flows. The empirical results show that there are 19 urban shadow areas within the downtown
                                         areas of Nanjing, 11 of which are distributed in the old downtown areas and the rest are relatively
                                         scattered in the periphery. As for morphological characteristics, these urban shadow areas differ
                                         from each other in terms of indicators such as building density and development intensity. Moreover,
                                         the empirical results show that these urban shadow areas are not isolated but closely connected
                                         with other parts of Nanjing. Based on the different spatio-temporal distribution patterns of their
                                         connections, the 19 urban shadow areas are divided into four types, and the characteristics of each
                                         type have been investigated by analyzing a representative shadow area. It is suggested that policies
                                         aiming to eliminate the negative effects of urban shadow areas should consider heterogeneity in their
Citation: Xiong, W.; Yang, J. The        spatial distributions within a city, the temporal distribution of their external connections, and their
Identification and Dynamics of
                                         dominant functions.
Urban Shadow Areas from the
Perspective of People Flows—A Case
                                         Keywords: urban shadow area; people flow; cellular signaling data; urban morphology; Nanjing
Study of Nanjing. Buildings 2023, 13,
2934. https://doi.org/10.3390/
buildings13122934

Academic Editors: Beibei Zhang,          1. Introduction
Jingyu Yu, Irem Dikmen, Sainan Lyu,
                                              The “dark-under-the-lights” areas caused by the long-term unbalanced and inadequate
Xiaoyan Jiang and Peng Cui
                                         development of urban space have always been sources of pain and difficulty in urban
Received: 15 October 2023                renewal. So far, scholars have mainly used the concept of “shadow areas” to discuss
Revised: 13 November 2023                the issue of “darkness under the lamp”, but existing research has mainly focused on the
Accepted: 21 November 2023               “shadow area” phenomenon on a regional scale [1–3], while relatively little attention has
Published: 24 November 2023              been paid to the phenomenon of “shadow areas” on an intra-urban scale [4–6]. However,
                                         since reforming and opening up, many Chinese cities have been faced with the prominent
                                         problems of unbalanced and even polarized development due to the rapid urbanization
                                         process. Such unbalanced development has been specifically manifested by the emergence
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
                                         of urban shadow areas, which are usually close to the urban central areas of a city but are
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
                                         characterized by “low-density buildings, low-end business types, and low-end functions”.
distributed under the terms and
                                         For instance, some studies have found that there are urban shadow areas of a certain scale
conditions of the Creative Commons       within about 500–800 m around a city’s central areas, such as those found in Zhujiang New
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://    Town and Guangzhou Beijing Road in Guangzhou, Yan’an Road in Hangzhou, Xinjiekou
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/         in Nanjing, etc. [5].
4.0/).




Buildings 2023, 13, 2934. https://doi.org/10.3390/buildings13122934                                         https://www.mdpi.com/journal/buildings
Buildings 2023, 13, 2934                                                                                            2 of 19




                                 In an era of stock planning, urban shadow areas are typical “high-value, low-price”
                           areas which usually include shantytowns, old communities, industrial relics, and other
                           spatial types [7]. In terms of spatial characteristics, such as development intensity, building
                           density, and building height, there is a huge gap between these urban shadow areas and
                           the surrounding urban central areas, which, to a certain extent, affects the happiness and
                           well-being of people living and working in these shadow areas. At the same time, while
                           these shadow areas promote the formation of the core structure of urban central areas, they
                           also exacerbate the unbalanced and inadequate spatial development of the urban central
                           areas. With the in-depth implementation of urban renewal policies in many Chinese cities,
                           how to further deepen the scientific understanding of the spatial development laws of
                           urban shadow areas has become an important issue that urgently requires more academic
                           attention [8].
                                 Existing research on urban shadow areas has mainly analyzed their spatial morpholog-
                           ical characteristics such as development intensity and building density [5,6]. Some studies
                           have also focused on how to detect urban shadow areas in remote sensing images by
                           developing some identification algorithms [9–11]. However, studies merely based on urban
                           morphology data may not fully reflect the spatial development patterns of urban shadow
                           areas, which does not help us understand the dynamic mechanisms of the formation of
                           urban shadow areas. In fact, due to advantages in location and cost, urban shadow areas are
                           the primary place for the spillover of non-central functions from their surrounding central
                           areas, such as residences, restaurants, express delivery, retail, and other functions that
                           provide citizens with security and convenient services. This results in significant flows of
                           different types of elements, such as people, logistics, and information, creating a dynamic
                           connection between urban shadow areas and their surrounding central areas. Among
                           the many types of element flows, people’s daily activities most directly reflect the needs
                           of different groups of people in urban shadow areas, and the interaction between daily
                           activities and urban morphology is also the most significant [12]. Therefore, the impact of
                           daily activities needs to be considered in the definition and identification of urban shadow
                           areas. At the same time, it is necessary to further explore the connection rules between
                           urban shadow areas and other parts of a city by analyzing the patterns of people flows,
                           which helps provide a theoretical basis for promoting the renewal of urban shadow areas
                           from a humanistic perspective.
                                 Against this backdrop, this paper takes Nanjing as an example, develops a method
                           to identify urban shadow areas, and analyzes how urban shadow areas are dynamically
                           connected with other parts of the city by drawing upon data on urban morphology and
                           people flows. In addition, policy implications concerning how to eliminate the negative
                           effects of urban shadow areas are also put forward based on the empirical findings. In doing
                           so, we aim to contribute to the existing literature by identifying and characterizing urban
                           shadow areas from both static and dynamic perspectives.
                                 The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews the existing
                           literature on the definition, identification, and evolution mechanisms of urban shadow
                           areas. Section 3 describes the data and methodologies used in this study. Section 4
                           presents the identification results of urban shadow areas in Nanjing. Section 5 analyzes
                           how urban shadow areas have been connected with the other parts of Nanjing from a
                           dynamic perspective. Section 6 discusses the empirical findings and puts forward some
                           policy implications and Section 7 concludes the study.

                           2. Literature Review
                                 Academic research on the “shadow area” phenomenon can be traced back to the discus-
                           sion of the “agglomeration shadow” effect in the new economic geography theory [13–15].
                           It is generally believed that small cities which are close to big cities suffer from many
                           restrictions in economic and social development because the competition effect is greater
                           than the “borrowed size” effect [1,16,17]. Recently, scholars have paid increasing attention
Buildings 2023, 13, 2934                                                                                           3 of 19




                           to the phenomenon of “shadow areas” mainly from three aspects, that is, the definition,
                           identification, and evolution of “shadow areas”.

                           2.1. The Definition and Characteristics of Shadow Areas
                                 As for the definition of “shadow area”, scholars have rarely used the concept of
                           “shadow area”, but usually other concepts such as “agglomeration shadow” [14–16] and
                           “interplaces between cities” [18,19], to explore the phenomenon of “shadow areas” on
                           a regional scale. Some scholars have used terms such as “distressed inner-city neigh-
                           borhoods” [4] and “inner-city suburbanization” [20,21], to explore the phenomenon of
                           “shadow areas” on in intra-urban scale. In addition to the different concepts used in the
                           literature, existing studies have different views on whether the development of “shadow
                           areas” will necessarily be negatively affected by surrounding large cities or surrounding
                           urban central areas. Some studies believe that small- and medium-sized cities can achieve
                           better development through “borrowed size” [16], whereas other studies believe that the
                           development of “distressed inner-city neighborhoods” is restricted by the central area of
                           the inner city [4].
                                 In the Chinese context, Zhang and Zhuang have paid attention to the “shadow area”
                           phenomenon at the regional scale and proposed the concept of a “metropolitan shadow
                           area” [22]. Recently, some scholars have also proposed concepts such as “development
                           shadow areas” [23] and “metropolitan multiple shadow areas” [24], while some scholars
                           have followed the concept of “agglomeration shadows” [25,26]. As the problem of the un-
                           balanced and inadequate development of urban space becomes increasingly prominent, the
                           phenomenon of “shadow areas” on an intra-urban scale has gradually attracted academic
                           attention, resulting in the emergence of concepts such as “city center shadow area” and
                           “city shadow area” [5–7]. Although there are differences in the use of multiple concepts,
                           scholars have generally believed that shadow areas have the following four characteristics.
                           The first one is a development gap phenomenon formed due to different combinations of
                           agglomeration and radiation in central cities and their surrounding areas [27]. Also, they
                           believe that shadow areas are scattered spaces that are located in the urban central area of a
                           city and that exhibit the characteristics of low-end service functions, old building forms,
                           and a sharp decline in the density and height index of public facilities [5]. The last two
                           consensual characteristics constitute a phenomenon in which a central city has a negative
                           effect on the development of its surrounding areas [28], as well as on areas maintaining
                           weak spatial connections with the central city’s industries [29].

                           2.2. The Identification of Shadow Areas
                                 Shadow areas at the regional scale have been mainly identified based on the scope
                           of influence of urban functions with a particular focus on small- and medium-sized cities
                           located between large cities [14]. Some studies have mainly drawn upon relevant theories in
                           the fields of regional economics and urban geography, focusing on analysis at the economic
                           and social development level. Commonly used indicators and methods include sensitivity
                           and influence coefficients [23], break points and comprehensive connection strength [24,28],
                           Huff model and spatial autocorrelation analysis [27], etc. In contrast, the identification
                           of shadow areas on an intra-urban scale has been mainly based on economic and social
                           development indicators such as housing prices, crime rates, and employment rates [4,21].
                           Meanwhile, recent studies have explored how to use spatial morphological indicators such
                           as development intensity and building density to identify shadow areas on an intra-urban
                           scale [5]. With the use of multi-source big data in urban morphology and cellular signaling,
                           some studies have expanded their research focus from the urban central area to the whole
                           city. For instance, Yang and Ma have identified the spatial scope of urban shadow areas in
                           Shanghai and analyzed their morphological patterns [6]. Sun et al. have used POI data to
                           study the impact of Shanghai on the distribution of shadow areas of service functions in
                           small towns in a southern Jiangsu province [29].
Buildings 2023, 13, 2934                                                                                             4 of 19




                           2.3. The Formation and Evolution Mechanisms of Shadow Areas
                                                                 ﬀ
                                 According to agglomeration–diffusion  theory, the formation and evolution of urban
                                                           ﬀ
                           shadow areas are essentially affected                                           ﬀ
                                                                  by the non-equilibrium aggregation and diffusion
                                                                                           ﬀ
                           of elements in space, and the forces driving the aggregation and diffusion of spatial
                                                                                              ﬀ
                           elements have diversified characteristics. Some studies have discussed     the effects of
                           specific factors, such as the residential preferences of middle-class families [20], the location
                           and accessibility of the shadow area [14,30], government planning policies [4], and urban
                           spatial structure [21,31]. The formation and evolution mechanisms of urban shadow
                           areas in the Chinese context have mainly been discussed via qualitative analysis. Such
                           discussions have mainly drawn upon theories such as Friedman’s “Core-edge” theory,
                                                                                                            ﬀ
                           Myrdal’s “diffusion-echo” theory, etc., which usually focus on spatial agglomeration–
                                                                                       ﬀ
                           diffusion interactions. In terms of specific influencing factors, studies differ from each
                           other. Some studies have emphasized the policy constraints on the development of shadow
                           areas from core cities [22,29] and the functional division of labor between the shadow area
                           as well as its immediately adjacent core city or core area [7]. Meanwhile, other studies
                           put industrial structures [29], the characteristics of people’s daily activities [6], regional
                           integration strategies [15], and network externalities [32,33] as the key points.

                           3. Materials and Methods
                           3.1. The Study Area
                                 The study area of this paper is the downtown area of Nanjing, the capital city of
                           Jiangsu Province, China. As the core urbanization area in Nanjing’s future development
                           process, it is also the main area for Nanjing to shoulder the function as a regional central
                           city. The downtown area of Nanjing consists of 4 administrative zoning districts, including
                           Jiangbei, Xianlin, Dongshan, and the main city, covering a total area of 846 km2 and with
                           a population of about 6.7 million (Figure 1). Although it only accounts for 12.8% of the
                           administrative area, this area contains 63.2% of the city’s total population.




                           Figure 1. The downtown area of Nanjing.
Buildings 2023, 13, 2934                                                                                        5 of 19




                           3.2. Data Source and Processing
                                The data used for this paper include Nanjing urban morphology data and cellular
                           signaling data. The urban morphology dataset is constructed based on the complete
                           and accurate vector topographic map of Nanjing’s downtown area, which is calibrated,
                           corrected, and updated after a field survey carried out by the author’s research group.
                           The urban morphology data contain detailed information on buildings, land plots, blocks,
                           roads, and the natural landscape environment (Figure 2). In the ArcGIS 10.3 platform, all
                           the above information is uniformly projected into the WGS_1984 coordinate system, which
                           is used to calculate the key indicators of urban morphology.




                           Figure 2. The urban morphology data of the study area.

                                For the cellular signaling data, this paper obtains data provided by China Mobile,
                           which covers approximately 70% of the share of the entire mobile phone market in Nanjing.
                           There are 104,247 mobile phone base stations in the downtown area of Nanjing and the
                           dataset covers 14 days in 2015, including 10 working days and 4 weekends. It is worth
                           mentioning that network interruption, transmission delay, external environment interfer-
                           ence, system failure, and other undesirable conditions are inevitable during the generation
Buildings 2023, 13, 2934                                                                                            6 of 19




                           and collection process of the cellular signaling data, which would generate some invalid
                           data. After data cleaning and considering the weather conditions, this paper finally selects
                           the data collected for 11 November (the working day) and 21 November (the weekend),
                           which have a normal distribution. The number of mobile phone users covered by the data
                           is more than 2 million per day.
                                Specifically, the database contains mobile phone base station data and cellular signal-
                           ing data. The former records the identification code of each base station and its correspond-
                           ing geographic coordinate information. For each base station, we can obtain the number of
                           users it records during each two-hour interval. By creating Tyson polygons based on the
                           location of base stations and allocating each base station to a block, we can then obtain the
                           number of people for each block during each two-hour interval. The latter data contain   tt
                           information on people flows. This includes anonymously encrypted mobile phone terminal
                           IDs, signaling type, and the time that signaling occurs when the phone is connected to the
                           base station. In order to simplify the data, this paper randomly projects the user’s location
                           to the adjacent block of the corresponding base station, and then maps all the stay points of
                           each user to obtain their movement trajectory on that day (Figure 3).




                           Figure 3. Spatial location mapping and trajectory generation of mobile phone users.

                           3.3. Methodology
                           3.3.1. The Basic Unit of Analysis
                                This paper selects blocks as the basic unit of analysis, mainly for the following two
                           reasons. On the one hand, one might argue that grids can be an alternative choice. However,
                           a grid is only a random division method for urban space, which has no planning significance
                           and thus cannot fully reflect the purpose of this paper. On the other hand, we think blocks
                           are a better choice than land plots. First, blocks are enclosed by roads with clear spatial
                           boundaries and can ttbe regarded as an independent spatial unit in the city. In contrast,
                           some land plots have human influence factors due to the issue of development rights.
                           Second, each block unit is relatively complete in form because of the enclosing of the roads.
                           Meanwhile, a block is, to a certain extent, a basic unit of people’s cognition of urban space.
                           Third, compared with blocks, land plots are more likely to have extreme or unbalanced
                           spatial characteristics due to the excessive or low development intensity of local areas,
                           which may lead to biased identification results. Consequently, this paper considers block
                           as an ideal unit of analysis for the identification of urban shadow areas. To this end, the
                           various types of data involved in this study are aggregated to a block level to calculate the
                           relevant indicators.

                           3.3.2. The Method of Identifying Urban Shadow Areas
                                In this paper, urban shadow areas are defined as areas that are adjacent to urban
                           central areas but with lower construction intensity, fewer public service facilities, and
                           insufficient population vitality. Based on this definition, this paper holds that three factors
                             ﬃ
                           should be considered in the identification of its spatial boundary, including construction
Buildings 2023, 13, 2934                                                                                               7 of 19




                           intensity, the number of public service facilities, and population vitality at the block level.
                           The expression of each indicator is given as follows:

                                                                          ∑kN=1 f loor_areai,k ×
                                                           Intensityi =                                                   (1)
                                                                              block_areai

                                                                           M
                                                           Facilityi = ∑ j=1 type_numberi,j                               (2)

                                                                           S
                                                              Popui = ∑l =1 base_popui,l                                  (3)
                           where Intensityi , Facilityi , and Popui represent the construction intensity, the number of
                           public service facilities, and the population vitality of block i, respectively. f loor_areai,k and
                           heighti,k mean the floor area and height of building k in block i. type_numberi,j reflects the
                           number of public service facilities of type j in block i. base_popui,l represents the number
                           of mobile phone users recorded by the base station l in block i.
                                 Specifically, considering that the urban shadow area is a relative concept, we identify
                           its spatial boundary through exploratory spatial data analysis, a method that has been
                           commonly adopted in recent studies [34–36]. The technical route of this identification
                           method is described as follows (Figure 4). For each indicator, we detect the local spatial
                           autocorrelation pattern of its distribution by calculating the local Moran’s I index. Blocks
                           with statistically significant values of local Moran’s I can be classified into four categories:
                           (1) blocks with high values of the indicator surrounded by those with similar high values
                           (HH); (2) blocks with low values of the indicator surrounded by those with similar low
                           values (LL); (3) blocks with high values of the indicator surrounded by those with low
                           values (HL); and (4) blocks with low values of the indicator surrounded by those with high
                           values (LH).




                           Figure 4. The technical route of the identification method.

                                 Furthermore, blocks that belong to the LH category, at least for two out of the three
                           indicators, can be regarded as part of potential urban shadow areas. On the one hand,
                           LH-type blocks suggest that these blocks have relatively lower values of an indicator but
                           are surrounded by blocks with higher values, which is in line with the definition of urban
                           shadow areas. On the other hand, we set stricter criteria that blocks should be LH-type
                           blocks for at least two indicators, which filters out blocks that only belong to the LH type for
                                                                                  tt                    ﬀ
                           just one indicator. This criteria helps to identify blocks that are more close to the definition
                           of urban shadow areas. One might argue for even stricter criteria that a block could only be
                           considered when it belongs to the LH type for all the three indicators. In fact, we tried these
                           criteria but found that they were too strict to identify enough urban shadow areas within
                                                                           ∑     𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑤      𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑤
                                                          𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦
                           the study area, which is not in line  with what we have observed in our field survey either.
                           In addition, as an urban shadow area should be a continuous one, the LH-type blocks are
                           further integrated if they are adjacent to each other under the criterion of rook continuity.
                                                                                    _
                                 So far, we have identified as urban𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜
                                                                       shadow areas those areas that are purely based on
                           statistical calculation, some of which might not fully reflect the spatial reality. Therefore,
                                     𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦       𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜
                                                                                                 𝑖               𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑤
                                                                                     𝑡
                                                                 𝑖                                                         𝑖
                            𝑓𝑙𝑜𝑤                                                                      𝑖
Buildings 2023, 13, 2934                                                                                            8 of 19




                           the identification result needs further correction and adjustment. On the one hand, we
                           filter out the identified urban shadow areas that mainly contain natural landscapes such as
                           mountains, water bodies, farmlands, and protective green space. Though these landscapes
                           have relatively lower levels of construction intensity and a lower density of public service
                           facilities, they are usually not close to urban central areas and thus cannot be regarded as
                           urban shadow areas. On the other hand, we filter out the identified urban shadow areas
                           that mainly contain public buildings such as museums, libraries, and schools. Though
                           these areas usually have relatively low construction intensity, they are often active, vibrant,
                           and full of people. Therefore, these areas cannot be seen as urban shadow areas either.

                           3.3.3. Indicators Reflecting the Dynamics of Urban Shadow Areas
                                In this study, we use two indicators to explore the dynamics of urban shadow areas.
                           One is the volatility of people flows and the other is the day–night ratio of people flows.
                           Specifically, the former indicator represents the stability of the overall people flows (both
                           inflow and outflow) of an urban shadow area during 12 time intervals, which can be
                           measured using the standard deviation method. The latter represents the difference in
                           the overall people flows between day and night for a certain urban shadow area. The
                           expressions of the two indicators are given as follows:
                                                                     v
                                                                     u                       2
                                                                     u 12
                                                                     t ∑t=1 f lowi,t − f lowi
                                                     Volatilityi =                                                     (4)
                                                                                  12

                                                                            f low_dayi
                                                               Ratioi =                                                (5)
                                                                          f low_nighti
                           where Volatilityi and Ratioi represent the stability of the overall people flows and the
                           day–night ratio of people flows for each urban shadow area i, respectively. f lowi,t reflects
                           the overall people flows at the time interval t, which is the sum of both people inflows
                           to the urban shadow area i and people outflows from the urban shadow area i. f lowi
                           means the average people flows of the urban shadow area i over a whole day. f low_dayi
                           and f low_nighti represent the overall people flows during the daytime and the nighttime,
                           respectively. The former is measured according to the people flows between 8:00 am and
                           10:00 am in the morning, while the latter is measured according to the people flows between
                           2:00 am and 4:00 am at night. The reason for choosing these two periods is that, according
                           to the habits of most people, these are the periods which best reflect and represent these
                           two types of behavior. Data on people flows of a certain urban shadow area and during a
                           certain time interval can be aggregated at the mobile phone base station level.

                           4. The Distribution of Urban Shadow Areas in Nanjing
                                Based on the above-mentioned data and method, we finally identify 19 urban shadow
                           areas within the study area, 11 of which are located in the old downtown area of Nanjing.
                           Table 1 describes the basic morphological information of these urban shadow areas, in-
                           cluding their areas, the number of blocks that they contain, and their nearby urban central
                           areas. Overall, these urban shadow areas contain 97 blocks, covering an area of about
                           13.53 square kilometers. Furthermore, these urban shadow areas have a total building floor
                           area of about 7.21 square kilometers, and a total building footprint area of about 2.88 square
                           kilometers. Therefore, the average plot ratio of these urban shadow areas is about 0.53
                           and the average building density is 0.21. Moreover, we can find that there is remarkable
                           heterogeneity among these urban shadow areas. For instance, their areas range from 4.19
                           hectares to 323.59 hectares, and the number of blocks they contain range from 1 to 14.
                           Despite this heterogeneity, we can see that all these urban shadow areas are close to at least
                           one urban central area of Nanjing.
Buildings 2023, 13, 2934                                                                                               9 of 19




                            Table 1. The basic information of 19 identified urban shadow areas in Nanjing.

          Name of Urban                                                                           Name of Nearby Urban
                                    Area (Hectares)                Number of Blocks
           Shadow Area                                                                               Central Area
         Wutang Parcel                   323.59                              1                  Wutang Plaza central area
      Qingliangmen Avenue                15.93                              1                        Hexi central area
           Liuhe Parcel                  149.28                             4                        Liuhe central area
         Baijiahu Parcel                   9.33                              5                     Baijiahu central area
        Andemen Avenue                   109.70                              6                 Confucius Temple central area
          Kening Road                    162.68                             11                     Baijiahu central area
        Fengtainan Road                  289.60                             12                       Hexi central area
        Shengzhou Road                    34.35                             14                 Confucius Temple central area
       Huowaxiang Parcel                  28.61                              5                    Xinjiekou central area
          Youfuxi Street                 18.18                              6                     Xinjiekou central area
          Hunan Road                      28.48                              3                   Hunan Road central area
          Pukou Parcel                   16.52                              3                      Jiangbei central area
          Xianlin Parcel                  69.22                              7                      Xianlin central area
            Yihe Road                     24.59                             14                   Hunan Road central area
         Cibeishe Parcel                  12.58                              2                    Xinjiekou central area
        Yunnanbei Road                     7.79                              2                   Hunan Road central area
          Qingshi Street                   7.48                              2                    Xinjiekou central area
         Guyilong Parcel                   4.19                              1                    Xinjiekou central area
         Jiankang Road                    9.64                              1                  Confucius Temple central area


                                 Figure 5 depicts the spatial distribution of urban shadow areas in Nanjing. Overall,
                            we can see that the distribution is characterized by internal agglomeration and external
                            dispersion. Specifically, internal agglomeration refers to the relatively dense distribution
                            of multiple urban shadow areas within the old downtown area of Nanjing, such as the
                            Xinjiekou central area, the Hunan Road central area, and the Confucius Temple central area.
                            For instance, urban shadow areas such as Guyilang Parcel, Qingshi Street, Youfuxi Street,
                            Huaihai Road, Huowaxiang Parcel, and Cibeishe Parcel are all around the Xinjiekou central
                            area, while urban shadow areas such as Hunan Road and Yunnanbei Road are close to the
                            Hunan Road central area. In addition, internal agglomeration is reflected by the fact that
                            these urban shadow areas are mainly clustered along the Zhongshanbei Road, Zhongshan
                            Road, and Zhongshandong Road, and along the Zhonghua Road to Zhonghuamen Gate,
                            which is spatially related to the city’s historical context. This may also reflect the historical
                            factors that influence the phenomenon of urban shadow areas. In fact, the Gulou District
                            and Qinhuai District within the old downtown area contain the largest number of urban
                            shadow areas, partly because these two administrative districts have a relatively long
                            history of development and are among the earliest developed areas in Nanjing. Therefore,
                            they are more likely to experience unbalanced development.
                                 External dispersion refers to the fact that the number of urban shadow areas is rela-
                            tively smaller outside the old downtown area. The distribution of the eight urban shadow
                            areas shows a relatively scattered layout, which has occurred in some newly developed
                            areas such as the Hexi central area in the west of Nanjing and the Dongshan central area
                            in the south of Nanjing. Specifically, urban shadow areas such as Qingliangmen Avenue
                            and Fengtainan Road are located in the Hexi central area, while the Dongshan central
                            area mainly contains urban shadow areas such as Baijiahu Parcel and Kening Road. Fur-
                            thermore, some urban shadow areas are located around the Jiangbei central area and the
                            Xianlin central area, which are further away from the old downtown area of Nanjing.
Buildings 2023, 13, 2934                                                                                       10 of 19




                           Figure 5. The spatial distribution of the urban shadow areas of Nanjing.

                           5. The Dynamic Connections between Urban Shadow Areas and Other Parts
                           of Nanjing                                                                            ‐
                                 Figure 6 shows the calculation results of the two indicators that we have constructed
                           to reflect the dynamic connections of the identified urban shadow areas with other parts of
                           Nanjing. As for the indicator of volatility of people flows, this ranges from 1.80 to 33.86
Buildings 2023, 13, 2934                                                                                          11 of 19




                           with an average value of 15.27. Specifically, the Wutang Parcel shadow area has the lowest
                           volatility value, while the Yihe Road shadow area has the highest volatility value. In terms
                           of the indicator of the day–night ratio of people flows, it has an average value of 5.04, with
                           the value of the Xianlin Parcel shadow area being the lowest (2.14) and that of the Jiankang
                           Road shadow area being the largest (9.70).




                           Figure 6. The distribution of two indicators of urban shadow areas.

                                In Figure 6, the two red lines represent the average values of the volatility and day–
                           night ratio, respectively. With the two average values as the threshold, we can further
                           divide these urban shadow areas into four types: (1) those with relatively low values of
                           both volatility and day–night ratio, including Wutang Parcel, Kening Road, Qingliangmen
                           Avenue, Guyilang Parcel, Hunan Road, Xianlin Parcel, and Liuhe Parcel; (2) those with
                           relatively low values of volatility but high values of day–night ratio, including Baijiahu
                           Parcel, Andemen Avenue, Fengtainan Road, and Shengzhou Road; (3) those with relatively
                           high values of volatility but low values of day–night ratio, including Huowaxiang Parcel,
                           Yunanbei Road, Pukou Parcel, and Youfuxi Street; and (4) those with relatively high values
                           of both volatility
                                           ﬀ and day–night ratio, including Jiankang Road, Qingshi Street, Cibeishe
                           Parcel, and Yihe Road. For each type, we select one representative shadow area to explore
                           in detail the characteristics of its dynamic connections with other parts of Nanjing as well
                           as the underlying mechanisms.

                           5.1. Low in Both Volatility and Day–Night Ratio: Using Wutang Parcel as an Example
                                For urban shadow areas that have relatively low values of both volatility and day–
                           night ratio, they generally have weak connections with other parts of Nanjing and these
                           connections are relatively stable over time. These shadow areas are mainly distributed in the
                           peripheral areas of Nanjing, which have been dominated by vacant land and agricultural
                           and forestry land. Therefore, they usually have fragmented spaces and are less attractive
                           for people.
                                Here, we take the Wutang Parcel shadow area as an example, which is located to the
                           north of the old downtown area of Nanjing (Figure 5). Its connections with other parts
                           of Nanjing at different time intervals is shown in Figure 7. Obviously, this area mainly
                           connects with its nearby areas, with a relatively lower level of connection strength and
                           fluctuation. The spatial morphology of this shadow area has two main characteristics,
Buildings 2023, 13, 2934                                                                                           12 of 19




                           which partly account for the distribution of its dynamic connections. First, this shadow
                           area is mainly surrounded by district-level urban centers and large residence, while the
                           area itself is dominated by abandoned plants and agricultural and forestry land. Therefore,
                           it lacks sufficient public service facilities and the development intensity of this area is
                              ﬃ
                           relatively lower than its surrounding areas. Second, the internal traffic network structure
                                                                                          ﬃ
                           of this shadow area is relatively broken, which mainly contains small and narrow roads.
                           Thus, the accessibility of this shadow area is weak, which is not attractive for people either.
                                                                                             tt
                           Taken together, we find that this shadow area can only provide very limited employment
                           opportunities and its public service facilities are not attractive for people to agglomerate.
                                                                                    tt
                           Consequently, it is expected to have low values in both volatility and the day–night ratio of
                           people flows.




                                        (a) 2:00–4:00 am                           (b) 8:00–10:00 am




                                       (c) 12:00–14:00 pm                         (d) 16:00–18:00 pm

                           Figure 7. The dynamic connections of the Wutang Parcel at ﬀ
                                                                                    different time intervals.
Buildings 2023, 13, 2934                                                                                             13 of 19




                           5.2. Low in Volatility but High in Day–Night Ratio: Using Baijiahu Parcel as an Example
                                 For urban shadow areas with low values of volatility but high values of day–night
                           ratio, their internal spaces are usually homogeneous, most of which are dominated by
                           production and manufacturing functions with a similar architectural texture. However,
                           due to the relatively large number of job opportunities these shadow areas can provide,
                           they usually have more frequent people flows during the daytime and less frequent people
                           flows during the nighttime.  tt Therefore, the day–night ratio of people flows for these shadow
                           areas is remarkable.
                                 This study takes the Baijiahu Parcel as an example to further explore the spatial char-
                                                                                                                   ﬀ
                           acteristics of these shadow areas. As shown in Figure 8, there is a remarkable difference     in
                           people flows between the daytime (8:00–10:00 am) and nighttimett(2:00–4:00 am), suggesting
                           a relatively high value of day–night ratio. Specifically, the spatial characteristics of the
                           Baijiahu Parcel shadow area can be discussed from the following aspects. First, since the
                           shadow area is within the Jiangning Development Zone of Nanjing, it has been dominated
                           by industrial land. Moreover, this shadow area has attracted   tt many high-tech industries
                           such as green and intelligent automobile manufacturing, life science, artificial intelligence,
                           and future networks. Such industries have enjoyed rapid development, which helps this
                           area provide relatively stable employment opportunities. Second, this shadow area has
                                              ﬃ
                           good traffic conditions.   It is adjacent to the Baijiahu central area of Nanjing, the Nanjing
                           South Station, and Nanjing Lukou International Airport, which ensures that the area has
                           good accessibility. From the perspective of urban morphology, however, the buildings of
                           this shadow area are relatively small in scale, being mainly low factory buildings with one–
                           three floors. Furthermore, there is a large proportion of vacant land due to the requirements
                           of production protection. In contrast, its surrounding areas contain many commercial
                           complexes and high-rise residential buildings.
                                 Influenced by the above-mentioned characteristics, the population type and the pattern
                           of their daily activities are relatively unitary. Employees working in these manufacturing
                           factories account for the majority population in this area, leading to a small residential
                           population base and a relatively low fluctuation rate. In addition, most of the employees
                           are residents living in nearby areas, which results in regular commuting behaviors. Taken
                           together, we can expect that the people flows of this shadow area are less fluctuating but
                           have a relatively high value of day–night ratio.




                                        (a) 2:00–4:00 am                          (b) 8:00–10:00 am

                           Figure 8. Cont.
Buildings 2023, 13, 2934                                                                                               14 of 19




                                       (c) 12:00–14:00 pm                           (d) 16:00–18:00 pm
                                                                                                     ﬀ
                           Figure 8. The dynamic connections of the Baijiahu Parcel shadow area at different time intervals.

                           5.3. High in Volatility but Low in Day–Night Ratio: Using Hunan Road as an Example
                                 For urban shadow areas with high values of volatility and low values of day–night
                           ratio, the most typical feature is the complexity of their land use. It not only contains some
                           dilapidated open space or land under construction, but also a certain amount of commercial
                           facilities. The lattertthelps attract
                                                              tt and gather people, resulting in relatively rich types of
                           people activities. However, due to the relatively weak functions in terms of residences
                           and employment, there is no significant difference
                                                                            ﬀ     in people flows during the daytime and
                           nighttime,tt which  usually  means   a relatively low day–night ratio.
                                 We select the Hunan Road shadow area as a typical representative of this type of
                           shadow area (Figure 9). This area used to be an important node of the network of people
                           flows in Nanjing. It was veryttattractive for people and consumers to visit because it is
                           close to the Xuanwu Lake and surrounded by many big commercial complexes. However,
                           with the continuous upgrading of urban development and the increasing of people’s
                           living demands, the attractiveness of this area is gradually declining and its renewal is
                                         tt
                           thus imminent. Under this background, this area has entered the stage of demolition
                           and reconstruction, leading to large-scale open spaces under construction. Furthermore,
                           influenced by the decline of its nearby commercial centers, the building density and
                           development intensity of this shadow area have gradually decreased, making this area
                           become increasingly less attractive for people to visit.
                                 tt
                                 Overall, on the one hand, the Hunan Road shadow area has some scattered commercial,
                                                                                                          tt
                           residential, and public service facilities. On the other hand, its development is affected
                           by neighboring commercial complexes, universities, parks, and hospitals. Influenced by
                                                                                                                   ﬀ
                           these two factors, this area has formed a moderate population base. However, the huge
                           difference between this area and its neighboring areas has led to a high level of volatility in
                             ﬀ of people flows. In addition, due to the relatively few employment opportunities it
                           terms
                           can provide, the differences in people flows of this area during the daytime and nighttime
                           is thus not remarkable,ﬀleading to a relatively low value of day–night ratio.
                                tt
Buildings 2023, 13, 2934                                                                                            15 of 19




                                         (a) 2:00–4:00 am                           (b) 8:00–10:00 am




                                        (c) 12:00–14:00 pm                         (d) 16:00–18:00 pm
                                                                                                 ﬀ
                           Figure 9. The dynamic connections of the Hunan Road shadow area at different time intervals.

                           5.4. High in Both Volatility and     ‐
                                                            Day-Night Ratio: Using Cibeishe Parcel as an Example
                                 The majority of the urban shadow areas with high values of volatility and day–night
                           ratio are within the range of the Xinjiekou central area of Nanjing. They are often dominated
                           by old residences and related public service facilities. Though possessing the advantages of
                           relatively dense public service facilities and rich job opportunities, these areas are faced
                           with the disadvantage of relatively high land price and living costs, which leads to a
                           significant tidal phenomenon of people flows.
                                 In this paper, the Cibeishe Parcel is selected as a typical representative of this type
                           of shadow area (Figure 10). This area is adjacent to the Xinjiekou central area and within
                           walking distance of commercial complexes such as Deji Square and the Jinlun International
                           Plaza. Therefore, it has an advantageous location and is surrounded by abundant com-
                           mercial and public service facilities. In terms of urban morphology, this area has many
                           old communities and historical relics. Therefore, the building height and development
Buildings 2023, 13, 2934                                                                                                16 of 19




                           intensity in this area is not so high. In fact, most buildings in this area are less than six floors.
                           Furthermore, the internal road network structure of this area is mainly for residential use
                           and daily commuting. However, due to its closeness to the Xinjiekou central area, this area
                           can provide necessary services for daily life, such as logistics delivery, catering, and leisure.
                           In addition, residents living in this area are also potential employees providing services for
                           the surrounding areas and even the whole city, which results in a relatively high level of
                           fluctuation of people flows. Meanwhile, because this area is dominated by residential land,
                           the employment opportunities it can provide are rather limited, which could also lead to a
                           relatively high value of day–night ratio in terms of people flows.




                                         (a) 2:00–4:00 am                             (b) 8:00–10:00 am




                                        (c) 12:00–14:00 pm                           (d) 16:00–18:00 pm
                           Figure 10. The dynamic connections of the Cibeishe Parcel shadow area at ﬀ
                                                                                                   different time intervals.

                           6. Discussions
                                In this paper, the existence of urban shadow areas, as well as their dynamic con-
                           nections with other areas, have been clearly demonstrated in the case of Nanjing. The
Buildings 2023, 13, 2934                                                                                            17 of 19




                           empirical results of this study suggest that urban shadow areas do exist in cities, which is
                           in line with other studies that have focused on shadow areas on an intra-urban scale [5–7].
                           However, these urban shadow areas are not isolated but have dynamic connections with
                           their neighboring central areas and other parts of the city. Therefore, merely considering
                           urban shadow areas as isolated and negative spaces may not fully capture the significance
                           of urban shadow areas to the overall development of a city. In fact, with the rapid develop-
                           ment of digitization and globalization, flows of people, logistics, capital, and information
                           have been substantially enhanced, which has also promoted the evolution of urban spatial
                           structures from a hierarchy to a network [31,33]. In this sense, urban shadow areas cannot
                           be simply regarded as isolated and negative spaces of a city. Instead, they actually maintain
                           dynamic connections with other parts of a city and are important nodes of a city’s network
                           structure [7].
                                 The empirical results have some policy implications for the planning and design of
                           urban shadow areas in a city. For policy makers, they should bear it in mind that urban
                           shadow areas exist at different development stages of a city. In other words, though these
                           areas may generate negative effects on their surrounding areas, these negative effects
                           cannot be permanently eliminated through urban planning and design due to the existence
                           of unbalanced development. The government should actively refine and activate the
                           characteristic resources of historical relics. Using a series of spatial organization methods,
                           such as public space and activity tour line, these resources are re-utilized and “darned”
                           into the overall cultural context of the city, so as to effectively locate or integrate them into
                           the characteristic space system of the city [6]. In brief, we suggest that policies aiming
                           to improve the development of urban shadow areas could consider the following three
                           aspects.
                                 First, the spatial distribution of urban shadow areas is heterogeneous across different
                           parts of a city. Such heterogeneity should be considered in the relevant policies. Specifically,
                           due to their advantageous locations, urban shadow areas in the old downtown areas of
                           a city usually have frequent people flows. Therefore, it would contribute greatly to the
                           development of these shadow areas if policies could leverage the important role of their
                           neighboring central areas to further enhance the vitality of these shadow areas [8]. For
                           urban shadow areas in the peripheral areas of a city, policies could focus on how to further
                           strengthen the comparative advantages of these areas so that they can integrate into a city’s
                           network structure.
                                 Second, the temporal distribution of the external connections of urban shadow areas is
                           also heterogeneous. For a certain urban shadow area, the overall volatility and the strength
                           of people flows are different during different time periods of a day, both of which are
                           influenced by both the shadow area itself and its nearby central areas. Therefore, it is
                           necessary to consider such temporal heterogeneity in the planning and design of urban
                           shadow areas to ensure that they maintain relatively enduring and stable vitality. For
                           instance, promoting the development of night markets might be a good way to utilize the
                           temporal characteristics of urban shadow areas, especially for those in the old downtown
                           areas of a city [23]. This is because these shadow areas are usually less attractive for people
                           during the nighttime. However, they often have large open spaces which can be utilized
                           to develop night markets. In doing so, the night markets can not only bring relatively
                           sustainable people flows to these shadow areas, but also help improve their popularity to a
                           certain extent.
                                 Third, urban shadow areas differ from each other in terms of their dominant functions,
                           which has also resulted in the spatio-temporal heterogeneity of their dynamic connections
                           with other areas. Therefore, such heterogeneity in dominant functions should be considered
                           in policies aiming to eliminate the negative effects of shadow areas on a city’s overall
                           development. For instance, for urban shadow areas dominated by residential functions,
                           it would be useful to diversify the building types with multiple functions to gradually
                           promote the formation of a diversified and inclusive community environment. For urban
                           shadow areas dominated by industrial manufacturing functions, promoting the renewal of
Buildings 2023, 13, 2934                                                                                                          18 of 19




                                  old and vacant factories and constructing industrial complexes could be an effective way to
                                  attract people and facilitate land use mixing.

                                  7. Conclusions
                                       The formation of urban shadow areas is a common phenomenon during the rapid
                                  process of urbanization. However, relatively few efforts have been made to delineate and
                                  characterize urban shadow areas in a more quantitative way. In this paper, we propose a
                                  method to identify urban shadow areas from the perspective of people flows. Taking Nan-
                                  jing as a case study and drawing upon data on urban morphology and cellular signaling,
                                  we have identified and investigated the dynamic connections of 19 urban shadow areas
                                  within its downtown areas. The empirical results show that urban shadow areas differ
                                  from each other in terms of their morphological characteristics such as building density
                                  and development intensity. While 11 urban shadow areas are within the old downtown
                                  areas of Nanjing, the distribution of the rest of the 8 shadow areas are relatively scattered in
                                  the periphery. Moreover, we find that these urban shadow areas are not isolated but closely
                                  connected with other parts of Nanjing, though the spatio-temporal distribution patterns
                                  of their connections differ to some extent. The 19 urban shadow areas are further divided
                                  into four types by considering their different distribution patterns of connections, each of
                                  which is investigated by analyzing a representative shadow area. Based on the empirical
                                  results, we suggest that policies aiming to eliminate the negative effects of urban shadow
                                  areas should consider heterogeneity in their spatial distributions within a city, the temporal
                                  distribution of their external connections, and their dominant functions.
                                       This study has some limitations which could serve as departure points for future
                                  research. For instance, due to data constraints, we have only investigated the dynamic
                                  connections of urban shadow areas on a given date. Therefore, future studies could consider
                                  comparing the connections from an evolutionary perspective. Furthermore, the underlying
                                  mechanisms behind the formation of different types of urban shadow areas have only been
                                  qualitatively discussed in this paper. Future studies could further explore the mechanisms
                                  in a more quantitative way.

                                  Author Contributions: Conceptualization, W.X. and J.Y.; methodology, W.X.; data curation, W.X.;
                                  writing—original draft preparation, W.X.; writing—review and editing, W.X. and J.Y.; visualization,
                                  W.X.; funding acquisition, W.X. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the
                                  manuscript.
                                  Funding: This research was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China, grant num-
                                  ber 52208063, the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province, China, grant number BK20220424
                                  and Basic Science (Natural Science) Research Projects in Higher Education Institutions in Jiangsu
                                  Province, grant number 22KJB560025.
                                  Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available on request from the
                                  corresponding author. The data are not publicly available due to privacy.
                                  Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Meijers, E.J.; Burger, M.J. Stretching the concept of ‘borrowed size’. Urban Stud. 2017, 54, 269–291. [CrossRef]
2.    Servillo, L. Tailored polities in the shadow of the state’s hierarchy. The CLLD implementation and a future research agenda. Eur.
      Plan. Stud. 2019, 27, 678–698. [CrossRef]
3.    Sun, D.; Zhang, J.; Hu, Y.; Zhou, L.; Yu, Z. The formation of metropolitan shadow from the perspective of industry spatial contacts:
      A comparison between Changjiang river delta and Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei metropolitan region. Sci. Geol. Sin. 2013, 33, 1043–1050.
4.    Ryan, B.D.; Weber, R. Valuing new development in distressed urban neighborhoods: Does design matter? J. Am. Plan. Assoc. 2007,
      73, 100–111. [CrossRef]
5.    Yang, J.; Hu, X. Study on shadow area of city centers in circle-core structure mode. China City Plan. Rev. 2012, 36, 26–33.
6.    Yang, J.; Ma, B. Morphological characteristics and pattern mechanism of urban shadow area: A case study of Shanghai’s
      “human-land-industry” from a multi-source big data perspective. China City Plan. Rev. 2019, 43, 95–106.
7.    Xiong, W.; Yang, J. Research on the driving force mechanism of the formation of urban shadow areas from the perspective of
      dynamic network. Archit. Cult. 2021, 1, 165–167.
Buildings 2023, 13, 2934                                                                                                          19 of 19




8.    Yan, W.; Zhang, L.; Duan, X.; Wu, F. Strategic approaches to realize sustainable neighborhoods in urban renewal: A case study of
      Banan, Chongqing, China. Sustainability 2023, 15, 3515. [CrossRef]
9.    Zhou, T.; Fu, H.; Sun, C.; Wang, S. Shadow detection and compensation from remote sensing images under complex urban
      conditions. Remote Sens. 2021, 13, 699. [CrossRef]
10.   Chen, Y.; Wen, D.; Jing, L.; Shi, P. Shadow information recovery in urban areas from very high resolution satellite imagery. Int. J.
      Remote Sens. 2007, 28, 3249–3254. [CrossRef]
11.   He, Z.; Zhang, Z.; Guo, M.; Wu, L.; Huang, Y. Adaptive unsupervised-shadow-detection approach for remote-sensing image
      based on multichannel features. Remote Sens. 2022, 14, 2756. [CrossRef]
12.   Elzeni, M.M.; ELMokadem, A.A.; Badawy, N.M. Impact of urban morphology on pedestrians: A review of urban approaches.
      Cities 2022, 129, 103840. [CrossRef]
13.   Krugman, P.R. On the relationship between trade theory and location Theory. Rev. Int. Econ. 1993, 1, 110–122. [CrossRef]
14.   Sohn, C.; Licheron, J.; Meijers, E. Border Cities: Out of the shadow. Pap. Reg. Sci. 2022, 101, 417–438. [CrossRef]
15.   Zhen, Y.; Shi, D.; Lu, Y. The impact of regional integration strategies on the formation of city regions and its agglomeration
      shadow: Evidence from the Yangtze River Delta, China. Land 2023, 12, 1053. [CrossRef]
16.   Burger, M.J.; Meijers, E.J.; Hoogerbrugge, M.M.; Tresserra, J.M. Borrowed size, agglomeration shadows and cultural amenities in
      North-West Europe. Eur. Plan. Stud. 2015, 23, 1090–1109. [CrossRef]
17.   Phelps, N.A.; Fallon, R.J.; Williams, C.L. Small firms, borrowed size and the urban-rural shift. Reg. Stud. 2001, 35, 613–624.
      [CrossRef]
18.   Phelps, N.A. Interplaces: An Economic Geography of the Inter-Urban and International Economies; Oxford University Press: Oxford,
      UK, 2017.
19.   Phelps, N.A. City systems research: From morphology to relationality and positionality. Int. J. Urban Sci. 2021, 25, 480–500.
      [CrossRef]
20.   Frank, S. Inner-city suburbanization–No contradiction in terms. Middle-class family enclaves are spreading in the cities.
      Raumforsch. Raumordn. Spat. Res. Plan. 2018, 76, 123–132. [CrossRef]
21.   Spórna, T.; Krzysztofik, R. ‘Inner’ suburbanisation–Background of the phenomenon in a polycentric, post-socialist and post-
      industrial region. Example from the Katowice Conurbation, Poland. Cities 2020, 104, 102789. [CrossRef]
22.   Zhang, J.; Zhuang, L. Study on the evolution mechanism and countermeasures of metropolitan shadow area. J. Nanjing Univ.
      (Nat. Sci. Ed.) 2000, 36, 687–692.
23.   Sun, J.; Lin, Y. From urban shadow area to frontier area: The effect of administrative division on small towns in the urban shadow
      area. Urban Plan. Forum 2013, 3, 50–53.
24.   Shi, Y.; Wang, X.; Chen, X.; Wang, Y. Development strategy for local central city in the shadow area of multiple metropolises:
      Dingzhou City, Hebei Province. Planners 2019, 35, 5–10.
25.   Sun, B.; Chen, Y. Xiong’an new area strategy is a sally port of solving the “poverty belt around Beijing and Tianjin” problem. Reg.
      Econ. Rev. 2017, 5, 67–71.
26.   Zhang, J.; Chen, H. A study of agglomeration shadow during urbanization in the new era—A case for high-speed Rail. China
      Econ. Q. 2022, 22, 281–302.
27.   Pan, J.; Yao, Y. Delimitation of metropolitan shadow area in Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei metropolitan region. J. Hum. Sett. W. China
      2017, 32, 100–106.
28.   Rahajeng, A.; Jaya, W.K.; Pangaribowo, E.H.; Darwin, M. Assessment of regional development pattern towards sustainability
      urban areas: Empirical evidence from Yogyakarta urban areas. Environ. Dev. Sustain. 2023. [CrossRef]
29.   Sun, D.; Lu, J.; Zhang, M.; Niu, F. Evaluation of service function of small towns in China from the perspective of borrowed size
      and agglomeration shadow: A case study of southern Jiangsu Province. Prog. Geogr. 2022, 41, 199–213. [CrossRef]
30.   Cuberes, D.; Desmet, K.; Rappaport, J. Urban growth shadows. J. Urban Econ. 2021, 123, 103334. [CrossRef]
31.   Yang, W.; Fan, F.; Wang, X.; Yu, H. Knowledge innovation network externalities in the Guangdong–Hong Kong–Macao Greater
      Bay Area: Borrowing size or agglomeration shadow? Technol. Anal. Strateg. Manag. 2022, 34, 1020–1037. [CrossRef]
32.   Wang, L.; Zhang, F.; Zang, Y.; Duan, J. Understanding the regional integration process from the perspective of agglomeration and
      urban networks: Case study in Central China. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022, 19, 12834. [CrossRef]
33.   Huang, Y.; Hong, T.; Ma, T. Urban network externalities, agglomeration economies and urban economic growth. Cities 2020, 107,
      102882. [CrossRef]
34.   Li, Y.; Derudder, B. Dynamics in the polycentric development of Chinese cities, 2001–2016. Urban Geogr. 2022, 43, 272–292.
      [CrossRef]
35.   Zhu, K.; Tu, M.; Li, Y. Did polycentric and compact structure reduce carbon emissions? A spatial panel data analysis of 286
      Chinese cities from 2002 to 2019. Land 2022, 11, 185. [CrossRef]
36.   Li, Y.; Du, R. Polycentric urban structure and innovation: Evidence from a panel of Chinese cities. Reg. Stud. 2022, 56, 113–127.
      [CrossRef]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
