[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: book/J11-andani-la-paix-rachmat-syabri-geurs-2021-job-access-and-spatial-equity-of-a-toll-road-no-doi.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Producer:        iLovePDF
ModDate:         Sun Aug 30 18:07:31 2026 WIB
Custom Metadata: no
Metadata Stream: no
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            none
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           22
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       585 x 738 pts
Page rot:        0
File size:       14393611 bytes
Optimized:       no
PDF version:     1.5
[Extracted Text]
13
Job Access and Spatial Equity of a
Toll Road

     I Gusti Ayu Andani, Lissy La Paix, Shanty Rachmat,
                Ibnu Syabri, and Karst Geurs


   Abstract: This chapter describes an evaluation of the job access and spatial equity
   impacts of the Cipularang toll road in the Jakarta – Bandung corridor in Indonesia, which
   was constructed in 2005. An ArcGIS, transport demand model extension, is used to
   obtain travel time and generalised cost estimates. The potential access measure and Shen
   access index are used to measure access with and without job competition. Spatial equity
   is examined based on the access measures using the Gini coefficient, Palma ratio, and
   a two-step cluster analysis. The analysis shows that the construction of the Cipularang
   toll road has reduced travel time in the whole region by 13% and potential job access
   increased by 5%. However, the toll road also increases job competition as more workers
   can access jobs available in the job-poor area in between Jakarta and Bandung, resulting
   in a small decrease in the number of accessible jobs per worker. This chapter concludes
   that the construction of the toll road has no impact on spatial equity as measured by the
   Gini coefficient and the Palma ratio.




Introduction
                                                                        Keywords:           Access;     Equity;
Access metrics estimating the number of activities that can be          Employment;      Job competition; Toll
reached within a certain area are often used in spatial equity          road

analysis as they are able to capture the quality of transport
infrastructure and the spatial distribution of the activities (land
use).1 However, applications of access metrics in ex-post evaluations   1
                                                                            (Geurs and Van Wee 2004).
of road investments are rare, in particular for developing countries.
240       applications of access



                                   A new road can have diverse equity impacts, ranging from access to
                                   social opportunities to regional economic developments.             A
                                   particular example is the construction of toll roads, which allow
                                   users to have a typical choice between a quicker but expensive route
                                   and a slower but inexpensive route. The additional costs and
                                   changes in travel time can be unevenly distributed across a
                                   population, according to socioeconomic level. There can even be
                                   groups for which the new road has detrimental effects. For
                                   example, high-income commuters in Cape Town, South Africa are
                                   more likely to benefit from toll roads whereas lower-income
2
    (van Dijk et al. 2015).        commuters choose alternative non-tolled routes.2
                                      This chapter presents an ex-post evaluation of the impact of a toll
                                   road on job access and spatial equity in a developing country context.
                                   We used an ArcGIS, transport demand model extension, to estimate
                                   the transport impacts of the introduction of the Cipularang toll road
                                   in the Jakarta – Bandung corridor in Indonesia.
                                      The Cipularang toll road links two major Indonesian cities,
                                   Jakarta, and Bandung. In 2004, 78.3 million passengers passed
                                   through the Jakarta - Bandung corridor, making it one of the busiest
                                   passenger transport routes in Indonesia. The distance between the
                                   cities is about 180 km and the modal split is dominated by car
3
    (Lubis et al. 2005).           traffic.3 Empirical evidence also suggests that the introduction of
                                   this toll road corridor induced positive responses from the real
4
    (Dorodjatoen 2009).            estate market.4
                                      In the Indonesian context, ex-post evaluation of transport
                                   infrastructure investments, as in many countries across the globe,
                                   has not yet received much attention. Ideally, transport policy should
5
    (Emberger et al. 2008).        follow the decision-making cycle,5 in which, needs or rationales are
                                   identified first to define the objectives or the desired transport
                                   system or system level. Then, an ex-ante evaluation (appraisal) is
                                   conducted to identify possible transport policies or projects.
                                   Subsequent steps (monitoring, ex-post evaluation and feedback)
                                   after the policy has been implemented are often neglected. An
                                   ex-post analysis is important as investigating past successes and
                                   failures improves the quality of appraisal for upcoming projects and
                                   enhances accountability. Many countries require ex-post evaluation
                                   of transport projects, however, few actually enforce this
                                   requirement, and this failure is often related to a lack of dedicated
                                   funding fur such evaluations and limited availability of relevant
6
    (Worsley 2017).                data.6
                                                 job access and spatial equity of a toll road                 241



Questions

This chapter addresses the following question:


• What is the impact of the toll road on job access and spatial
  equity?


   Given the importance of toll roads in the development of the
major road network in Indonesia, this chapter focuses on the
ex-post evaluation of the Cipularang toll road.        This chapter
conducts an empirical calculation of several access measures to
distinguish between the effects on jobs and working population
distribution. The Gini coefficient, Palma ratio, and a two-step
cluster method are also applied to gain insight into the distribution
of the impacts on job access across the region.



Methods

To assess the impact of the Cipularang toll road on access and
spatial equity, we applied three stages of analysis in this chapter.
Firstly, we created an ArcGIS transport network, then the 4-step
transport model extension Traffic Analyst for ArcGIS7 was used and       7
                                                                             (Rapidis 2018).
calibrated to produce traffic flows, travel time and generalised cost
matrices in a scenario with and without the toll road. Next, we
developed a 24-hour traffic simulation, which included the toll road.
The use of the transport demand model enabled us to consider
congestion effects by adding capacity restraints in the traffic model.
We employed road network data from OSM8 as it provided road              8
                                                                             (OpenStreetMap contributors 2016).
network data up to the local level. Applying four-step models is
challenging because of data limitations. It is important to note as
well that our model aimed to predict travel times in the
Jakarta-Bandung region and, specifically, traffic flow on the corridor
of the Cipularang toll road, thus we ignored traffic on other roads.
   Secondly, we calculated access indicators by using the generated
travel time and cost matrices, considering the number of jobs and
the size of the working population. Thirdly, we conducted a spatial
equity analysis based on the equity indices (Gini coefficient and
Palma ratio) and spatial distribution of access among districts with
a two-step cluster method. The unit of analysis in this chapter is
districts in the study area.
242       applications of access



                                      Traffic simulation
                                      The traffic simulation was conducted through the conventional
                                      4-step model. Firstly, a number of trips were generated in each
                                      district by considering the population size and the proportion of
                                      residential area as production parameters and the number of jobs
                                      and the proportion of industrial and commercial areas as attraction
                                      parameters. The parameters were estimated from a regression
                                      analysis using population and land use data from the Jakarta
9
    (JICA 2004).                      metropolitan area.9
                                         In the second phase, the balanced-generated trips were
                                      distributed using the Furness method. This method also used a
                                      deterrence function, which was calculated from the gravity
                                      parameter and road traffic cost matrix. The gravity parameter
                                      assumes that a higher travel time will result in fewer trips made. We
                                      calculated it from the Indonesian labour force travel survey that
10
     (BPS 2015).                      mapped the mobility of labour forces in the study area in 2015.10
                                         Furthermore, road traffic cost was calculated from generalised
                                      cost considering the travel time between districts (using Google
                                      Maps API), fuel cost for each type of vehicle and value of time. The
                                      value of time was derived from a stated choice experiment survey
11
  See (Andani et al. 2021) for more   conducted in the Jakarta-Bandung region for 1,600 respondents.11
details about this experiment.        Next, a growth factor forecasting calculation (Furness method) was
                                      performed on the balanced generated trips and converted into an
                                      origin-destination (OD) matrix.
                                         In the third phase, OD matrices for three modes were estimated
                                      (car, heavy vehicle, and motorcycle), using the proportion of mode
                                      share in the area. Lastly, the road traffic assignment was carried
                                      out, assigning the generated OD matrix to the road network. A user
                                      equilibrium algorithm was used in this assignment. This last step
                                      produced the best travel route, the amount of traffic and the costs
                                      (travel time, distance, and generalised cost) for the pair of zones.


                                      Access measurements
12
     (Hansen 1959).                   Access, is defined as the potential of opportunities for interaction.12
                                      There are many definitions afterwards. On the basis of a large
13
     (Geurs and Van Wee 2004).        number of studies,13 were able to distinguish four main elements to
                                      define access: transport, land use, temporal, and individual
                                      components. Access measures can be also categorised into: (1)
                                      infrastructure-based access, (2) location-based access, (3)
 See more details in (Geurs and
14
                                      person-based access, and (4) utility-based.14
Van Wee 2004).
                                                        job access and spatial equity of a toll road          243



   In this chapter, we applied infrastructure-based measures to
assess the performance of the road network as well as
location-based measures. The infrastructure-based measure focuses
on the performance or service level of transport infrastructures,
such as the length of infrastructure networks, level of congestion
and average travel speed on the road network. It is worth noting
that estimating travel time without considering capacity restraints
and traffic flow will result in underestimation. Hence, several
researchers also developed a traffic model to evaluate road
infrastructure investment.15                                                  15
                                                                                For example (van Dijk et al. 2015,
   Furthermore, we estimated two access measures. Firstly, the                Xiong et al. 2015).

standard job potential access measure was calculated by weighting
opportunities in a certain area by using an attribute of attraction
(population, facilities, etc.) and a measure of impedance (distance,
travel time, cost). Secondly, the Shen access index was estimated to
incorporate the spatial distribution of jobs and the working
population competing for these jobs.16 Thus, we evaluated the                 16
                                                                                   (Shen 1998).
combined effects of transport elements and job distribution,
augmented by the inclusion of congestion and competition effects.


Average travel time and generalised cost Average travel time and
generalised cost cr were calculated by summing up the travel time
or generalised costs for all the trips from one origin (i) in situations
with the Cipularang toll road (r = 1) and without it (r = 0), and
then dividing this by the total amount of trips possible (n) from that
origin.

                                        ∑i ci,r
                                 cr =                                (13.1)
                                         nci,r

   The monetary cost in the link was determined from the
generalised cost, taking into account fuel cost and value of time (Vt ).
   The generalised cost in link l (Cg,l ) was calculated using the
following formula:


                   Cg,l = C f ,l · dl + Cτ,l · dl + Ct,l · Vt        (13.2)

   where C f ,l is fuel cost (IDR per kilometre), dl is the length of the
link (in kilometre), Cτ,l is toll cost (IDR per kilometre), Ct,l is travel
time (hour), and Vt is the value of time (IDR per hour). A list of all
variables can be seen in Table 13.3.
244      applications of access



                                                                            Distribution function
Table 13.1: Goodness of fit ( R2 )         Impedance
                                                           Log-logistic      Gaussian      Negative     Power
of fitted distribution functions                                                          exponential
                                             Time               1.00            0.99         0.99       0.86
                                        Generalised cost        1.00            1.00         0.97       0.77



                                     Potential job access Job access denotes the ease that spatially
                                     distributed jobs can be reached from a given location. The most
                                     used potential access measure is based on Hansen’s access
17
     (Hansen 1959).                  formula,17 as follows:

                                                               Si,r = ∑ Ej · f (cij,r )                    (13.3)
                                                                        j

                                         Here, Si is the access for location i with toll road (r=1) or without
                                     (r=0), Ej is the number of relevant jobs in location j, cijr is the cost
                                     (i.e. travel time or generalised cost) of a trip from i to j with toll
                                     road (r = 1) or without (r = 0), and f (cijr ) is the cost decay function
                                     measuring the spatial separation between locations i and j.
                                         The cost decay function reflects the friction in connecting zones i
                                     and j in the network and is negatively correlated with the
                                     attractiveness of the destination (i.e. jobs). The access results,
                                     therefore, are profoundly affected by the decay function. Various
                                     types of cost decay were tested for the access analysis such as
                                     negative power, negative exponential, Log-logistic and the Gaussian
                                     specification (see the comparison in Table 13.1 and Figure 13.1).
                                     Note that the power function is not depicted in Figure 13.1 as the
                                     probability value is very low. Regarding the impedance parameter
                                     based on the household survey data, we found that the log-logistic
                                     cost decay function (Equation 13.4) produced the best fit with the
                                     travel data.
                                         The log-logistic cost decay function is specified as:

                                                       f (cij ) = [1 + exp( a + b · ln(cij ))]−1           (13.4)

                                       where a and b are parameters to be estimated. We estimated the
                                     parameters of separate log-logistic functions for both time and
                                     generalised cost (Table 13.2).

                                     Potential job access with impedance function and competition (Shen index)
                                                         job access and spatial equity of a toll road                245




                                                                               Figure 13.1: Net auto vs. net
                                                                               transit access to all jobs via auto
                                                                               within 30 minutes




   To improve these access measures, we considered competition in              Table 13.2: Parameters for log-
the access measurement by including the potential demand for jobs.             logistic cost-decay function
Potential job access measures the number of jobs within reach of
                                                                                         Impedance               a   b
a resident from an origin within a certain travel distance (potential
supply) divided by the potential number of residents within reach                     Travel time (Ct )    -11.55 2.50
                                                                                    Generalised cost (Cg ) -11.71 2.10
of the same destination (potential demand).18 The Shen index is
similar to the two-step floating catching area (2SFCA) method used             18
                                                                                    (Shen 1998).
in geography19 to access spatial access to health care. Several authors        19
                                                                                    (Radke and Mu 2000).
enhanced the 2SFCA method by for example incorporating distance
decay.20 In this chapter, we refer to this access measure as the ‘Shen         20
                                                                                    e.g., (Luo and Wang 2003).
index.’ If the Shen index is 1, then the number of jobs is proportional
to the size of the working population. It can be calculated with the
following formula:

                             f (cij,r )
                 Air = ∑                , D jr = ∑ Lk f (ckj,r )      (13.5)
                         j
                                Dj               k

    Here, Ai is the Shen Index or the ratio between the potential job
access of people living in location i, with toll road (r=1) or without
(r=0) and the number of people seeking job opportunities in location
j (D j ), Ej is the number of relevant jobs in location j, is, Lk is the
number of the working population in the study area, and f (ckjr ))
is the impedance function measure the spatial separation between k
and j, with toll road (r = 1) or without (r = 0).
    This chapter used data collected from the Indonesian database
for policy and economic research21 to calculate job access. We used            21
                                                                                    (WorldBank 2018).
246       applications of access



                                          Notation   Description
      Table 13.3: List of variables
                                          c          Cost (i.e. Travel time or generalised cost) of a trip
                                          Cg         Generalised cost (IDR)
                                          Cf         Fuel cost (IDR per kilometer)
                                          d          The length of the link (in kilometer)
                                          Cτ         Toll cost (IDR per kilometer)
                                          Ct         Travel time (hour)
                                          Vt         Value of time (IDR per hour)
                                          S          Potential access of a location
                                          E          Number of relevant jobs in a certain location
                                                     Shen Index (the ratio between the potential jobs access
                                          A
                                                     and the number of people seeking job opportunities)
                                          D          People seeking job opportunities
                                          Lk         Working population in the study area
                                          l          Link in the network
                                          r          Existence of a toll road [1,0]
                                          i          Origin of a trip
                                          j          Destination of a trip



                                      employment data as a proxy for the number of jobs in the study area
                                      and defined employed people as persons who worked for pay or
                                      assisted others in obtaining pay or profit for at least one hour during
                                      the survey week. In addition, we used labour force data to calculate
                                      the number of job seekers in the study area. In this context, ‘labour
                                      force’ is defined as persons 15 years old and older who are working,
                                      are temporarily absent from work but had jobs, or who do not have
22
     (BPS 2015).                      work and are looking for work.22 This way, we exclude people of
                                      working age who are in schools, doing housekeeping, or not doing
                                      or looking for any profitable activity. This data is only available at
                                      the municipality level; to be able to conduct analyses at the district
                                      level, this data is extrapolated by using the population ratio. Note
                                      that due to data limitations, we were unable to distinguish between
                                      employed workers and job seekers and account for job types (e.g., by
23
     See (Smith et al. 2020).         occupational class).23


                                      Measuring spatial equity
                                      access is normally used for equity analysis because it emphasises
                                      people and their interactions with places, and also captures both
                                      transport infrastructure and the spatial structure of the destinations
24
     (Geurs and Van Wee 2004).        (land use).24 In the perspective of access, equity is commonly
25
     (Van Wee and Geurs 2011).        differentiated into spatial and social equity.25 Spatial equity refers
                                                  job access and spatial equity of a toll road                    247



to the geographical location of an individual, population group, or
region, which is affected by an infrastructure project. Social equity
is concerned with the impact of the infrastructure project on the
economic or social condition of the individual, population group, or
region. Since this chapter focuses on the geographical impacts of a
toll road, spatial equity (i.e. its overall distribution, inequity at the
extreme groups and whether job access is distributed evenly across
the region) is addressed. To that end, we measured the Gini
coefficient, Palma ratio, and the spatial distribution of access with a
two-step cluster method.
   Several statistical indicators can be used to assess the spatial
equity implications of access impacts of road investments. A
comprehensive study comparing various equity measures to assess
the impact of road pricing policy concluded that using a single
measure can lead to a biased evaluation.26 The Gini coefficient,27          26
                                                                                 (Ramjerdi 2006).
which has been widely used to assess income inequity, is insensitive        27
                                                                                 (Gini 1936).
to any changes in measurement (scale-independent), which gives it
a major advantage over other measures. The Gini coefficient also
has been adopted to evaluate distributional impacts of access in
some studies.28                                                              (Lucas et al. 2016, Pritchard et al. 2019,
                                                                            28


   The Gini coefficient is commonly used to measure the                     Van Wee and Geurs 2011).

distribution of income. It is a value between 0 and 1, where 0 is
perfect equity and 1 is perfect inequity. We calculated the Gini
coefficient to compare access levels with and without the toll road.
We estimated the coefficient by using the trapezoidal Lorenz curve
approximation, depicting the (ranked) cumulative share of access
against the cumulative share of the corresponding population by
district across the Jakarta – Bandung region. A Gini coefficient of
0.5 says that there is high inequality, but says nothing about the
distribution of that inequality.29 Since income per capita data is not      29
                                                                                 (Banister 2018).
available, monthly expenditure per capita data is used in the
analysis. The spatial distribution of monthly expenditure per capita
across districts in the study area can be seen in Figure 13.3(left).
   Complementary to the Gini index, we also explored the Palma
ratio.30 Originally, the Palma ratio depicts the ratio of income            30
                                                                                 (Palma 2011).
shares between the richest 10% and the poorest 40%. Palma
observed that changes in income are almost exclusively due to the
changes in the share of the richest 10% and poorest 40% because the
middle-income group between the richest and the poorest always
capture approximately 50% of gross national income. He pointed
248       applications of access



                                            out that the stability of income share of the middle is a consistent
                                            finding across different data sets, countries and time periods.
                                               In this chapter, we calculate the Palma ratio to assess the inequity
                                            between the average access of the richest 10% districts and the
 Adopting methods from (Guzman and
31
                                            poorest 40% districts.31 A Palma ratio of 2.0 indicates that the top
Oviedo 2018) and (Pritchard et al. 2019).   10% (in terms of income) has twice the (job) access level as the
                                            lowest 40%. To account for the spatial distribution of job access, we
                                            clustered job access measures among districts in the study area by
                                            using a two-step cluster method in which the number of clusters
                                            was determined based on the minimum value of the Bayesian
32
     (Schwarz 1978).                        information criterion – BIC.32 Cluster analysis is commonly used in
                                            transport and land use domain studies to create groups of areas
                                            with homogeneous access measures and land use characteristics.
                                            This method enabled us to identify the characteristics of districts
                                            that are likely to benefit from the new toll road and classify them
                                            based on the access impacts.
                                               Several variables are also included to identify the characteristics
                                            of districts that are likely to benefit from the new toll road and
33
     (Chi 2012).                            classify them based on the access impacts. According to Chi,33 the
                                            impact of a new highway differ across rural, suburban, and urban
                                            areas.    A new toll implementation would affect each income
34
  (Di Ciommo and Lucas 2014, van Dijk       population segment differently.34 Therefore, in the cluster analysis,
et al. 2015).                               we considered variables of residential land use growth and monthly
                                            expenditure per capita (as a proxy to income) to classify the
                                            districts. Furthermore, as the focus of this chapter, distribution of
                                            jobs and working population are also included in the cluster
                                            analysis.


                                            Study area
                                            The study area covers approximately 15,250 km2 in the corridor
                                            between Jakarta and Bandung as shown in Figure 13.2. The name
                                            ‘Cipularang’ is a contraction of ‘Cikampek, Purwakarta and
                                            Padalarang.’ This toll road connects Jakarta and Bandung by
                                            connecting      the    Jakarta-Cikampek     toll  road  and    the
                                            Padalarang-Cileunyi (Padaleunyi) toll road (of which the Pasteur
                                            toll road in Bandung is also a part). The Cipularang toll road has
                                            five gates; three gates are located in the West Bandung Regency ,
                                            and the other two are in the Purwakarta Regency. The study area
                                            covers of 16 cities or regency and 229 districts.
job access and spatial equity of a toll road       249




                         Figure 13.2: Study area
250       applications of access




Figure 13.3: Spatial distribution
of (left) monthly expenditure          Between 2004 and 2013, residential land use increased by 2.5%
per capita, (center) jobs, and      and industrial land use by 1%.35 The emergence of industrial and
(right) working population          residential areas contributed to the increasing access, although jobs
                                    and the working population are still concentrated in the Jakarta and
                                    Bandung metropolitan area, as shown in Figure 13.3.
35
     Andani et al. 2019.

                                    Findings

                                    This section presents the results of the traffic simulation (average
                                    travel time and generalised cost), for potential job access and the
                                    spatial distribution of these values across the region.


                                    Travel time estimation
                                    Several performance measures were applied to evaluate the
                                    accuracy of the match between the observed travel time, derived
                                    from the Google Maps API, and simulated travel time. The value of
                                    the RMSPE is 9.7%, and the value of the correlation coefficient is
                                    0.90. This indicates that the error is small enough and the accuracy
                                    of the model high enough to be able to predict travel time between
                                    origin-destination pairs. As Figure 13.4 shows, the model results
                                    show a similar pattern to the observed travel times. The estimated
                                    traffic flows on the Cipularang toll road are in line with the
                                    observed traffic data, with a percentage error of 3.7%. Figure 13.5
                                    shows that without the Cipularang toll road, there is less traffic in
                                                job access and spatial equity of a toll road              251




                                                                         Figure 13.4:     Comparison
                                                                         between observed and model
                                                                         results




Bandung and the northern part of this region. On the other hand,
there is a significant increase in traffic on the other regional
non-tolled roads.
   The average travel time between districts was estimated to be 154
minutes, similar to the observed travel time obtained from Google
Maps API (155 minutes). The most strongly impacted regions are
in the corridor including the north-western area in Jakarta and the
south-eastern region in Bandung (see Figure 13.6).
   Regions in the west, such as Bogor and Cianjur, appear to be least
affected by the development of the Cipularang toll road. Overall,
weighted by the traffic flow, the Cipularang toll road has reduced
the average travel time in the whole region by 13%; see Table 13.4.
Several districts in Purwakarta experienced a weighted average travel
time reduction up to 25%. This can be explained by the fact that
this area contains two toll gates. It is also situated between two
employment centres in the area: Jakarta and Bandung. This finding
supports the observation that the impact of toll mostly occurs in the
area alongside the toll road.36                                          36
                                                                              (Van Wee and Geurs 2011).
   When we looked at specific origin-destination pairs, we found
that the greatest reduction in travel time occurred between
Cipendeuy (a district in the Bandung regency) and Teluk Jambe (a
district in Karawang), which had almost 1.5 times greater travel
times without the Cipularang toll road. The difference between the
estimated average generalised cost with and without the toll road is
not as great as the difference for the average travel time, given that
252   applications of access




Figure 13.5: Changes in traffic
flow without the Cipularang toll
road




                                   to use the toll road, users need to pay a fee, which increases the
                                   total travel cost. As observed from Figure 13.6, the estimated
                                   average travel time and generalised cost show a contrast between
                                   areas in the toll road corridor and areas at great distances from it.


                                   Potential access measures

                                   Table 13.5 presents the results of various access measures, weighted
                                   by the working population in each zone. access measures with time
                                   decay showed more significant changes than measures with
                                   generalised cost impedance. This indicates an overestimation of the
                                   impact as it is only taken into account the travel time. It is worth
                                   noting that the result of each access measures in this chapter is
                                   different from each other, though complementary to each other.
                                                job access and spatial equity of a toll road          253




                                                                         Figure 13.6: Relative difference
                                                                         of weighted average (left) travel
Moreover, the potential access measures particularly highlight
                                                                         time and (right) generalised cost
differences in job access between large urban agglomerations and
                                                                         between districts
rural areas.
   Furthermore, the Shen index (Figure 13.7a) shows the proportion
between the potential number of jobs that can be accessed and the
potential demand for jobs.        Several districts in Jakarta and
Purwakarta have Shen indices equal to one, which indicates that the
number of jobs and the size of the working population are in
balance. A district in Bekasi, known as the largest industrial area in
Indonesia, has a Shen index of more than 2.0, which signifies that
there are more jobs available than workers. However, in contrast
with other measures, the Shen index is lower in the scenario with
the Cipularang toll road (see Figure 13.7a). The reason is that the
Cipularang toll road not only increased job access, but also working
population access. The Shen index decreases the strongest in the
job-poor area between Jakarta and Bandung. The construction of
the Cipularang toll road also enabled the working population in the
two large cities to access new jobs emerging in the new industrial
areas along the toll road.
   Previous findings that the number of large and medium-sized
industries has increased by almost 15% in Purwakarta and that the
254       applications of access



                                                    Statistics    Travel Time    Generalised Cost
Table 13.4: Descriptive statistics
                                                                    (minutes)         (1,000 IDR)
of estimated average travel time
and generalised cost                                         With Cipularang toll road
                                                    mean             154.5                        231.7
                                                    max              332.6                        453.8
                                                    min              109.4                        180.3
                                                    st. dev.          36.5                         43.6
                                                           Without Cipularang toll road
                                                    mean             167.5              233.4
                                                    max              335.1              454.3
                                                    min                129              180.6
                                                    st. dev.          35.5               43.6

                                        industrial relocation was due to the proximity to Jakarta and the
37
     (Dorodjatoen 2009).                availability of cheaper labour strengthen this result.37 The growth of
                                        new settlement areas was also observed in Purwakarta. Dorodjatoen
                                        found that people from Bandung and Jakarta were the predominant
                                        residents of the new settlements.          The construction of the
                                        Cipularang toll road enabled them to obtain less expensive housing
                                        in Purwakarta and commute daily to one of the two big cities.


                                        Spatial equity evaluation
                                        Equity indices Table 13.6 shows the results for both equity indices
                                        with the Shen index and with potential job access using generalised
                                        cost decay; both are weighted by the working population. access
                                        measures with time decay were not included in the equity analysis as
                                        it only took the travel time into account. This led to an overestimation


                                          Weighted access                                     Impedance
                                                                     Scenario
                                             measure                                   Time     Generalised cost
                                          Working                w/ toll road        8,135,674            11,304,273
                                          population             Without toll road   7,804,450            11,264,201
                                          access                 Relative change          4.2%                  0.4%
                                                                 w/ toll road              0.73                  0.73
                                          Shen Index             Without toll road         0.78                  0.74
                                                                 Relative change         -5.6%                -0.41%
                                                                 w/ toll road        6,016,274             8,251,967
Table 13.5:         Results of access     Potential job access
                                                                 Without toll road   5,755,050             8,221,007
measures
                                                job access and spatial equity of a toll road               255




                                                                         Figure 13.7: Relative changes in
of the access impact of the toll road and, therefore, was not a good     Shen Index with and without the
approach to measure the inequity.                                        toll road (left) and Shen Index
   In general, we found that the construction of the toll road had no    with the toll road (right)
impact on the average level of spatial equity as shown by the values
of the Palma ratio and Gini coefficient with regard to potential job
access, and of the Palma Ratio using the Shen index. However, we
observed a slight increment of the Gini coefficient using the Shen
index. This indicates that, overall, the introduction of the toll road
has benefited high-to-medium income workers more than
low-income workers, but the Palma ratio shows that people in the
top 10% of incomes did not benefit more from the toll road than
those in the lowest 40%.
   However, this result is not fully representative, as mode choice
was not taken into account. In Indonesia, low-income workers rely
on motorcycles,38 but motorcycles are not allowed on most toll roads.    38
                                                                              (Herwangi et al. 2015).
In practice, this means that higher-income workers benefit more than
lower-income workers.39                                                  39
                                                                           See Andani et al. (2021) for a
                                                                         more elaborate discussion on how the
                                                                         travel behaviour of various population
Cluster analysis The Gini index and Palma ratio (see the previous        segments is affected by the Cipularang
                                                                         toll road.
section) do not explain the spatial distribution of the changes in
equity and the characteristics of districts that are most likely to
256       applications of access




Table 13.6:   Equity indices                        Access measures.       Scenario          Palma ratio   Gini coefficient
weighted     by     working
                                                                            w/ toll road        1.10             0.30
population, with generalised                        Shen index
                                                                           w/out toll road      1.10             0.29
cost decay
                                                                            w/ toll road        1.14             0.38
                                                    Potential job access
                                                                           w/out toll road      1.14             0.38




                                                  benefit from the new toll road. This section, therefore, presents the
                                                  results of an analysis of the spatial distribution of access carried out
                                                  with a two-step cluster method.
                                                     As all types of potential access (labour market, job and Shen
                                                  index) are highly correlated (>0.9), only the Shen index with
                                                  generalised cost decay is included in the cluster analysis. We
                                                  consider this access measure the most comprehensive of the
                                                  measures tested in this chapter since it incorporates the competition
                                                  effect and is calculated using generalised cost decay. Furthermore,
                                                  we also took into account residential land use growth, monthly
                                                  expenditure, number of jobs and working population of the areas in
                                                  the analysis.
                                                     Figure 13.8 and show the cluster map and the profiles of each
                                                  cluster containing the mean of each variable (cluster centre),
                                                  respectively. We obtained three final clusters (based on minimum
                                                  BIC value), which we distinguished these clusters as (1) affected
                                                  areas, (2) unaffected and more urbanised districts and (3) unaffected
                                                  and less urbanised districts.
                                                     Cluster 1 accounts for 2.6% of the 229 districts in the area. This
                                                  cluster has the lowest relative change in the Shen index (-2%), while
                                                  the changes in the other clusters are almost zero, thus this cluster
                                                  experienced increased inequity. This can also be seen in the
                                                  mismatch between the number of jobs and the size of the working
                                                  population.      This cluster can also be characterized as highly
                                                  accessible, as it is situated close to the toll gates and has the highest
                                                  reduction of average travel time relative to the situation before the
                                                  construction of the Cipularang toll road (see Figure 13.6), with the
                                                  highest expenditure per capita as well. This result also in line with
                                                  the result of the Shen index, as shown in Figure 13.7(left). It is
                                                  consistent with the findings of several studies that the most affected
                                                  areas by the construction of new motorways were areas along the
40
     e.g., (Ghani et al. 2016, Ji et al. 2014).   roads and close to the exits.40
                                                   job access and spatial equity of a toll road          257



                                                               Cluster Centre
              Variables
                                                           Cluster 2           Cluster 3
                                        Cluster 1
                                                         Unaffected and    Unaffected and    Combined
                                    Affected districts
                                                         more urbanised     less urbanised
     Shen-index relative change           -2.02%              -0.34%           -0.48%          -0.49%
     Monthly expenditure/capita
                                           8626                2473             1342            1750
     (1,000 IDR)
     Residential land use growth
                                           5.0%                5.2%             2.9%            3.4%
     (2004-2013)
     Working population                  104,303             155,695           54,766          75,456
     Number of jobs                       14,526             138,027           36,204          55,201


                                                                            Table 13.7: Final cluster centre
   The shares of the number of jobs and the size of the working
population in the other two clusters are somewhat proportional.
However, Cluster 2 (unaffected and more urbanised districts) can be
characterized as more urbanised due to its large number of workers
and jobs, as well as its high rate of residential land use growth. This
cluster accounts for 19.2% of the total districts in the region.
Furthermore, Cluster 3 (unaffected and less urbanized districts)
contains most districts in the study area (78%). This cluster is
characterised by the lowest number of jobs and the smallest
working population, the lowest average monthly expenditure, and
the lowest residential land use growth.
   These results highlight that the construction of a new toll road can
have significant spatial equity impacts on areas close to the toll gates.
The decreased travel times and the emergence of new employment
along the toll road corridor increases the number of workers who can
access employment. This cluster result explains the results of both
equity indices (Palma ratio and Gini coefficient).


Conclusions

We examined the impact of the Cipularang toll road in Indonesia on
job access and spatial equity by isolating the effect of the toll road.
We applied a macroscopic traffic simulation model to obtain valid
estimates of travel time and generalised cost. Job competition,
represented by the Shen index, was also measured to reflect the
distributions of employment and working population. We then
assessed the equity impact by using the Palma ratio, Gini coefficient
and spatial distribution of the access changes with a two-step
cluster analysis.
258    applications of access




      Figure 13.8: Cluster map
                                                  job access and spatial equity of a toll road   259



   We found that area along the toll road and close to the toll gates
are the most affected by the construction of the Cipularang toll road.
Our analysis shows that the construction of the Cipularang toll road
has reduced the average travel time in the Jakarta-Bandung area by
13%. For specific origin-destination pairs, the travel time is now up
to 1.5 times shorter. The access analysis shows that the choice of
indicator affects the results. Employment and working population
access have increased by 5%. However, the toll road also increases job
competition as more workers can access jobs available in the job-poor
area in between Jakarta and Bandung, resulting in a small decrease in
the number of accessible jobs per worker. Most affected areas have a
relatively large working population compared to the number of jobs
and experienced residential land use growth. We can conclude that a
new toll road in developing countries with un-mature road networks
can have positive as well as negative impacts on the areas close to it.
   This chapter adds to the literature by examining job access and
spatial equity impacts of a major toll road in a developing country
context with the addition of congestion effects and stated
choice-based value of time in the traffic simulation. The findings of
this chapter highlight the potential value added of access analysis in
the transport planning practice. access analysis can help to improve
the integration of land use and transport planning with the goal of
enabling all individuals, regardless of their social class or ability, to
participate in desired activities in the area using the transport
system.


Next

There remain opportunities to extend this research.
   Firstly, we did not examine the impact of the toll road on spatial
developments, e.g., distribution of employment, population or
housing costs. The inclusion of these data in the measurement
certainly will affect the potential job access measure.
   Secondly, we were not able to estimate job access for different
worker groups as reliable sector-level employment data or detailed
data on the working population is not available at a high spatial
resolution in Indonesia.
   Finally, this chapter did not consider the complexity and
differences in individual travel behaviour.        It is important to
incorporate the availability of transport modes at the individual
level, as in Indonesia, low-income workers rely on motorcycles,
260   applications of access



                               which are not allowed on most toll roads. Therefore, higher-income
                               workers may benefit more than lower-income workers.
