[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: journal/J16-hudalah-2017-governing-industrial-estates-on-jakartas-periurban-area-from-shadow-government-to-network-governance-10.1111-sjtg.12177.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Title:           Governing industrial estates on Jakarta's periurban area: From shadow government to network governance
Keywords:        10.1111/sjtg.12177 and FDI; governance; industrial estate; Jakarta Metropolitan Area; periurbanization; politics
Author:          Delik Hudalah
Creator:         Arbortext Advanced Print Publisher 9.0.114/W Unicode
Producer:        Acrobat Distiller 9.5.0 (Windows)
CreationDate:    Fri Jan 27 02:15:56 2017 WIB
ModDate:         Fri Feb  3 06:29:18 2017 WIB
Custom Metadata: yes
Metadata Stream: yes
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            none
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           17
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       487.559 x 697.323 pts
Page rot:        0
File size:       827819 bytes
Optimized:       yes
PDF version:     1.4
[Extracted Text]
                                                                                         doi:10.1111/sjtg.12177


  Governing industrial estates on Jakarta’s
periurban area: From shadow government to
           network governance
                                                Delik Hudalah
 School of Architecture Planning and Policy Development, and Research Centre for Infrastructure and
             Regional Development, Bandung Institute of Technology, Bandung, Indonesia

                     Correspondence: Delik Hudalah (email: d.hudalah@sappk.itb.ac.id)

This article investigates the way in which periurban politics have mediated foreign direct investment
relocations and facilitated the spatial restructuring of the Jakarta Metropolitan Area (JMA), one of
the largest and fastest-growing megaurban regions in Asia. We conducted a series of in-depth inter-
views in Cikarang, the largest, most developed industrial estate corridor in the urban periphery of
JMA. We identiﬁed institutional settings, power struggles and governance mechanisms underlying
the industrial estate transitions in the past three decades. We found that periurban governance in
JMA has resulted in poor infrastructure connectivity and tight interactor and inter-regional compe-
tition. As global economic turbulence and decentralization policies restrict the effectiveness of
privatization strategies, network strategies are trialled to promote sustainability and inclusiveness
in JMA’s industrial estates and towns.

Keywords: FDI, governance, industrial estate, Jakarta Metropolitan Area, periurbanization, politics


Introduction

Globalization of investments has long contributed to Indonesia’s economic growth and
spatial development. During the Dutch colonial era in the nineteenth and twentieth cen-
turies, large-scale foreign investment projects in agricultural, agri-industrial and mining
sectors changed the traditional rural landscapes in Java, Sumatera and Kalimantan
(Lindblad, 2008). Because of the industrialization policy in Suharto’s era (1966–98), for-
eign direct investment (FDI) in manufacturing since the 1980s has driven the expansion
of mega property development in the form of regional infrastructure and private indus-
trial estates in the periurban areas of the Jakarta Metropolitan Area (JMA) (Firman,
1998).
    Periurban areas, periurban fringes or periurban interfaces originally refer to the
transitional zones between the urban and the rural. In most developing and transitional
countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America, periurban areas consist of urbanizing areas
that are functionally integrated and extend from existing cities but are physically located
outside designated city boundaries (Simon, 2004; 2008). In their early development,
periurban areas in Asia may take the form of ‘desakota’, which refer to zones of sporadic,
gradual rural to urban transition, where agricultural, industrial and urban activities
coexist and intermingle intensively (McGee, 1991). Periurban areas may occupy wide
regions with radius of tens to hundreds kilometres away from the main city centres. Re-
cently, they are often seen to be the most problematic part of an urban, metropolitan or
megaurban region, because of their mixed and dynamic land uses, rapid transformation
and globally induced industrial development (Webster, 2002; Aguilar et al., 2003;
Hudalah et al., 2007; Keivani & Mattingly, 2007).
    This article attempts to respond to the lack of knowledge on the political and institu-
tional complexity of globally linked rapid periurbanization, i.e., urban development
Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography 38 (2017) 58–74
© 2017 Department of Geography, National University of Singapore and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd
Governing industrial estates                                                            59


processes in the outskirts of established city boundaries (Keivani & Mattingly, 2007). It
approaches the complexity by drawing on the shifting conceptual paradigm between
government and governance. First, the term ‘government’ highlights the use of monop-
olistic and coercive power (of the state) in maintaining public order, coordinating
interests and enabling collective action (Stoker, 1998). Meanwhile, for the same outputs,
the governance perspective emphasizes innovative processes, noncoercive mechanisms
and informal institutional arrangements in the context of blurring boundaries between
the state, market and society (Bevir, 2011). Using the institutionalist approach, Pierre
(1999) argues that different modes of governance may be formed in different cities,
depending on the systems of political, economic and social values and beliefs within
which the cities are situated. The general criteria used in evaluating modes of governance
include key participants and their relations, the political objectives and the main instru-
ments employed to achieve the objectives (DiGaetano & Strom, 2003).
    This article particularly seeks to explore the governance formation surrounding
kawasan industri, or industrial estates, and town formation in JMA. With a total popula-
tion of more than 22.5 million, JMA is Indonesia’s largest periurbanizing region with a
multitude of challenges, including but not limited to environmental degradation, social
segregation and intergovernmental coordination (Firman, 2009; Hudalah & Firman,
2012). This article addresses several questions: To what extent have domestic institu-
tional settings played a role in the realization of FDI relocations in periurban JMA?
How are FDI relocations interlinked with the periurban governance? How can this
global–local nexus explain the periurban spatial restructuring in JMA?
    The main case study is the Cikarang industrial corridor, located in Bekasi Regency
and about 35–40 km east of Jakarta. Covering a planning area of almost 15 000 ha,
private industrial estates in Cikarang have become Indonesia’s largest manufacturing
powerhouse. A recent study shows that Bekasi Regency, with a total population of
2 989 198 (The Indonesia Central Bureau of Statistics, 2014), captures about 50 per cent
of JMA’s FDI in the secondary sectors, which is mostly invested in Cikarang (Hudalah &
Firman, 2012). The same study also emphasizes that manufacturing contributes to
almost 80 per cent of the gross domestic product (GDP) of this regency. These industrial
estates accommodate more than 3000 companies from over 30 countries (The Indonesia
Central Bureau of Statistics, 2005). They employ at least 532 814 local and foreign
workers (West Java Provincial Government, 2010). Their employment structure is
typiﬁed by high-technological and heavy industries such as automotive, electronics,
chemical, machinery, paper, metals and plastics (Hudalah et al., 2013).
    This article presents a brief note on methodology, followed by the role of three main
actors or factors contributing to the industrial estate development: the central
government in creating a broader context of FDI and manufacturing relocations in
JMA; private developers in periurban spatial restructuring in JMA since the 1980s; and
domestic institutional settings in reshaping local government in the periurban area,
notably the country’s transition to democratic decentralization. The main analysis
explores the dynamics of governance mechanisms underlying periurban settlement
transitions in Cikarang in the past three decades. The article concludes that a ‘shadow
government’—referring to active, exclusive roles of private developers operating outside
existing representative government structures—was a very inﬂuential mode of
governance during the early formation of the industrial estates and towns. Furthermore,
a new mode of governance has been trialled, stressing the importance of networking,
cooperation and collaboration among developers and between the private and public
sectors in addressing spatial fragmentation and poor infrastructure connectivity.
60                                                                           Delik Hudalah


Methodology

The research uses a mixed-methodological approach. I collected secondary data from
statistical reports, press releases, ofﬁcial documents and newspaper articles, to explain
FDI relocations in JMA and spatial restructuring in the case study. Furthermore, to
uncover the dynamics of periurban politics and governance, I conducted a series of infor-
mal interviews with those directly involved in the spatial and governance transformation
in the Cikarang industrial corridor since the 1980s. The respondents included local and
provincial government ofﬁcials, private developers, industrial estate and town managers,
the industrial developers’ association, industrial town planners, urban designers and
architects. The interview questions in this study mainly elicited respondents’ back-
ground, views and experiences in the building of the global periurban area of Cikarang.
I conducted 20 individual and group interviews and several follow-up interviews be-
tween 2012 and 2013. Each interview lasted for about one hour.
    The main analysis of historical data in this study explores the dynamics of
competition, conﬂicts, confrontations and cooperation among different participating
groups with different interests at different spatial scales through time. The in-depth
governance analysis pays particular attention to transport infrastructure networks,
which are considered to be a deﬁning yet neglected spatial element of periurban areas
(Hudalah et al., 2007).


Industrial estate development from 1980s to 2010s

The central government policy and surge and fall of FDI in JMA
The second half of the 1980s marked a worldwide expansion of FDI. According to Urata
(1993), apart from the strong global economic environment at that time, this rapid FDI
expansion was seen as a response of major newly developed countries such as South
Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore to a declining competitiveness of their
manufacturing products. In these countries, higher production costs associated with
stricter environmental regulations, rising wages and land rent, and currency revaluation
resulted in inefﬁcient production systems (Wie, 1991). Furthermore, as the newly
developed countries’ economic structure stabilized, strong government intervention in
the manufacturing sector increased the transaction costs and thus hindered innovation
and expansion of companies in their home countries (Hatch & Yamamura, 1996). These
combined production and institutional factors particularly forced Japanese, and later,
Taiwanese and South Korean companies to rapidly relocate their manufacturing
functions to emerging Southeast Asian countries, including Indonesia.
    Since 1966, the New Order regime led by former President Suharto has quickly
liberalized the Indonesian economy. To boost the national economic growth and
improve the standard of living, the central government periodically designed market-
oriented and outward-looking policies. It gradually simpliﬁed laws and regulations to
create more favourable conditions for private participation and foreign investments.
From the 1980s to 1990s, the government focused its economic policies on reducing
dependence on oil and gas revenues, by capturing the upcoming global relocation of
export-oriented industries mainly from Japan and the four newly industrialized coun-
tries of South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore (Wie, 1991). During this period
the government progressively extended the liberal and market-oriented policies through
massive enactment of deregulation packages in trade, ﬁnancial, industrial and property
sectors (Henderson & Kuncoro, 1996; Firman, 1998; Tambunan, 2008).
Governing industrial estates                                                           61


    Among other instruments enacted to help speed up the absorption of FDI in
manufacturing, the Presidential Decree No. 53 Year 1989 provided a legal basis for pri-
vate and foreign companies to actively participate in industrial land development and
management (Government of the Republic of Indonesia, 1989). The decree also
highlighted that manufacturing activities had to be planned and concentrated in indus-
trial estates with the provisioning of infrastructure and supporting environmental facili-
ties, and emphasized that industrial estates must be developed and operated by licensed
companies.
    Since the exchange rate devaluation and liberalization policies of the late 1980s,
Indonesia has increasingly enjoyed an FDI boom period (Hill, 1988). Most large-scale,
export-oriented FDI in manufacturing is concentrated in areas within a distance of
50 km from major cities or around the four largest metropolitan regions in Java, namely
JMA, Surabaya, Bandung and Semarang (Henderson & Kuncoro, 1996; Kuncoro, 2000;
Kuncoro & Wahyuni, 2009). The largest concentration of globally-linked manufacturing
can be found in West Java, especially in JMA, Indonesia’s largest urban and industrial
agglomeration (Hill, 1990). Most FDI within JMA is increasingly located in the periurban
areas mainly consisting of regencies and municipalities bordering with Jakarta: Bogor,
Depok, Tangerang and Bekasi (also known as Bodetabek) (Figure 1). According to the
data provided by the Indonesia Investment Coordinating Board (2014), in 1996, FDI in
the periurban areas accounted for USD 12.5 trillion, while the metropolitan core
absorbed only USD 1.2 million.
    However, in 1997 uncontrolled ﬂows of short-term transnational investment trig-
gered the Asian economic crisis. The ﬁnancial crisis badly hit Indonesia, causing the
FDI in JMA to dramatically drop to the lowest level in ﬁve years. In this period, the
periurban areas suffered the most, because the FDI was mostly concentrated in
manufacturing and foot-loose industries, which are highly dependent on foreign inputs
and have a limited technological lifetime (of 10–15 years). While other Asian countries
quickly recovered, Indonesia descended into multidimensional economic and political
crises. The national economy took a decade to recover; only in the second half of the
2000s did FDI start to grow again, ﬁrst in the core of the JMA, and later in its periurban
areas.
    From 2007 to 2009, the integration of local and global ﬁnancial markets led to the
global ﬁnancial and European debt crises. However, Indonesia was not signiﬁcantly




Figure 1. FDI in Jakarta Metropolitan Area from 1990 to 2012.
Source: Analysed from the Indonesia Investment Coordinating Board (2014).
62                                                                            Delik Hudalah


affected, because of its stable political environment, stronger macroeconomic founda-
tions and a large domestic market. In fact, together with China and India, two other large
emerging Asian countries, Indonesia has become a bright spot for FDI in the face of the
global uncertainty (CCTV English, 2012). As a result, since the beginning of the 2010s,
FDI in periurban Jakarta has picked up, almost reaching the level of the 1990s boom pe-
riod. The proportion of FDI in periurban Jakarta has taken over again the proportion of
FDI in the metropolitan core.


The spatial restructuring of the periurban area of Jakarta by private developers
In addition to regulatory and policy reforms, major regional infrastructure projects initi-
ated by the central government have contributed to the periurbanization of FDI in
emerging Asian countries (Douglass, 2000; Wei & Leung, 2005). Likewise, the rapid
ribbon-like spatial pattern of urban and industrial development in JMA cannot be sepa-
rated from the construction of intercity toll roads in the 1980s, which connected Jakarta’s
downtown, seaport and airport with the neighbouring peripheral areas (Rimmer & Dick,
2009). Particularly, Jakarta-Merak Intercity Toll Road (98 km) and Jakarta-Cikampek
Intercity Toll Road (83 km) built along the coastal zone are the physical foundation for
the emergence of globally linked industrial estates and towns along the western and
eastern periurban corridors, including Cikarang in Bekasi Regency (Figure 2).
    In addition to regional accessibility, private industrial developers also consider the
availability of large amounts of cheap and vacant landto locate new factories and housing
facilities in the urban peripheries (Rimmer & Dick, 2009). Cikarang formerly consisted of
arid land, excavated for the production of roof tiles and bricks. However, within a




Figure 2. Map of Jakarta Metropolitan Area (JMA).
Source: Adapted and updated from Hudalah & Firman, 2012.
Governing industrial estates                                                            63


decade, the periurban area has dramatically transformed from this unfertile, neglected,
rural hinterland into JMA’s largest industrialized and urbanizing periphery (Figure 3).
   Seven private developers (industrial estate companies) can currently be found in
Cikarang (Table 1). Most of the industrial estates were established and built between
1989 and 1990—except for Deltamas (Greenland International Industrial Centre), which
was built in the early 2000s. Several of these companies were jointly created with foreign
investors. For instance, Bekasi Fajar Industrial Estate and Marubeni Corporation from
Japan established a joint company to build the MM2100 industrial estate. East Jakarta
Industrial Park is also co-owned by a Japanese investor, Sumitomo Corporation. Another
Japanese investor, Sojitz Corporation, made a strategic alliance with Sinarmas Land, a




Figure 3. Growth of industrial estates and new towns in Cikarang from 1980s to 2010s.
Source: Author’s analysis.
64                                                                                        Delik Hudalah


Table 1. The industrial estates in Cikarang.

Industrial estate                   Granted area Country of origin                     Year of operation/
                                    size (Ha)    (company)                             development

Bekasi Fajar                           2100       Indonesia (Bekasi Fajar                    1989
Industrial Estate                                 Industrial Estate)
Deltamas (Greenland International      3000       Japan (Sojitz Corporation)              Early 2000s
Industrial Centre)                                and Indonesia (Sinarmas Group)
East Jakarta Industrial Park            320       Japan (Sumitomo Corporation)               1989
Hyundai Inti Development                200       South Korea (Hyundai Corpora-              1989
                                                  tion) and Indonesia (Bekasi Inter-
                                                  national Industrial Estate)
Jababeka                               5600       Indonesia (Jababeka Group)                 1989
Lippo (Delta Silicon)                  2500       Indonesia (Lippo Group)                    1989
MM2100                                 1200       Japan (Marubeni Corporation)               1989
                                                  Indonesia (Bekasi Fajar Industrial
                                                  Estate)

Sources: Lippo Cikarang (2009); Hyundai Inti Development (2010); Jababeka (2010); MM2100 Industrial
Town (2010); East Jakarta Industrial Park (2014).

subsidiary company of Indonesia’s largest developer (Sinarmas Group) to initiate the
industrial estate project of Greenland International Industrial Centre located in the
Deltamas new town. Meanwhile, Hyundai Inti Development was the result of coopera-
tion between Bekasi International Industrial Estate and Hyundai Corporation, South
Korea. Other industrial estates were built by Indonesia’s largest conglomerates and prop-
erty developers, Lippo Group (Delta Silicon) and Jababeka.
    Jababeka is the largest industrial estate company in Cikarang and is probably the only
private industrial estate in Cikarang that reﬂects a considerable level of diversity. Their
tenants largely include small and medium-sized companies from more than 30 countries
(Jababeka, 2011). In comparison, the other six industrial estates attract only groups of
large-scale multinational companies from a select few countries (Table 2). The
Japanese co-owned industrial estates, MM2100 and East Jakarta Industrial Park, are
traditionally dominated by Japanese multinational companies. Likewise, Bekasi Interna-
tional Industrial Estate (Hyundai) from the beginning envisioned to support Korean
high-tech companies. Clearly, globally linked industrial estate development in Cikarang
tends to stimulate segregation by nationalities, probably because of the cooperation strat-
egies commonly used by the East Asian multinational companies to promote vertical in-
tegration in their global production networks (Hatch & Yamamura, 1996).
    Initially, most developers focused their business operation on purely industrial estate
development and management. However, the massive FDI inﬂows, which peaked in the

Table 2. Investors by country of origin in four industrial estates in Cikarang (2010).

Origin of investor         MM2100          Bekasi International      East Jakarta           Delta Silicon
                                           Industrial Estate         Industrial Park

Domestic                       35                   75                      4                    20
Foreign                       141                   37                     77                    93
           Japan              121                    6                     73                    13
           Korea                6                   24                      0                     9
           Taiwan               1                    3                      1                    26
           Other               13                    4                      3                    45
Total                         176                  112                     81                   113

Source: Analysed from Institut Teknologi Bandung (2012).
Governing industrial estates                                                                           65


mid-1990s, have resulted in a rapidly growing number of migrant workers and popula-
tion. Within 20 years, the population of industrial districts in Cikarang grew rapidly from
less than 5000 in 1989 to almost more than 1.2 million in 2009 (Hudalah & Firman,
2012). The associated population growth generated huge multiplier effects related to
the fulﬁllment of daily economic and social needs. Given these new opportunities,
Jababeka gradually diversiﬁed its business orientation. While the ﬁrst project (Jababeka
I) was focused on developing and managing industrial land, the second one (Jababeka
II), which was started in the early 2000s, attempted to capture a growing demand for
housing and urban facilities.
     Several external factors in the 1980s to 1990s such as the deregulation packages in
banking and ﬁnancial sectors, high economic growth and a rising number of middle-
income households have encouraged big developers to shift their business orientation
to creating new exclusive living environments in the periurban areas (Winarso &
Firman, 2002). For instance, Lippo Cikarang (2009) envisioned kota mandiri or ‘self-
sufﬁcient towns’, by providing a ‘place to work, to live, and to play’ (Table 3). In general,
the industrial estates in Cikarang successfully built industrial, commercial and residential
areas along with premium education, healthcare and leisure facilities such as private
universities and schools, international standard hospitals, hotels, shopping malls, recrea-
tional parks and entertainment centres (Hudalah & Firman, 2012).
     The private living environment tends to transform into a property machine that
divides the growing number of inhabitants into fragments based on social classes (Pírez,
2002; Merriﬁeld, 2013). In periurban Jakarta, exclusive middle-upper income housing
construction has facilitated the formation of gated communities and reinforced social
segregation in and surrounding the new towns ( Leisch, 2002; Firman, 2004). The
integration of locality into the global economy may further increase these inherent in-
equalities and divisions within the local economies (Gugler, 2004; Palit, 2009). In


Table 3. Visions and missions of industrial estates and new towns in Cikarang.

Industrial estate         Vision                               Mission

Jababeka                  ‘To become the most respected        ‘Reliable, professional and always
                          and environmentally friendly         striving to exceed expectation’
                          township developer’
Lippo Cikarang            ‘Place to work, to live, and play’   ‘To become a leading industrial,
                                                               commercial, and residential-based
                                                               urban developer in Indonesia,
                                                               through urban infrastructure, public
                                                               facility, and managerial investment . . . ’
Bekasi International      ‘To be Indonesia’s leading
Industrial Estate         industrial provider of superior
(MM2100)                  business environment and services
                          for manufacturing companies and
                          related operations’
East Jakarta              ‘Global Corporate Making great       ‘To become a leading industrial park
Industrial Park           Contributions to Society’            in Asia . . . ’
Deltamas                  ‘A Better Living’                    ‘To create a pleasant, harmonious and
                                                               sustainable living environment for
                                                               its residents’
Bekasi Fajar Industrial   ‘To create a high-technology and
Estate (Hyundai)          comprehensive industrial park
                          to support Korean companies’

Sources: Lippo Cikarang (2009); Hyundai Inti Development (2010); Jababeka (2010); MM2100 Industrial
Town (2010); East Jakarta Industrial Park (2014).
66                                                                                  Delik Hudalah


Cikarang, the emergence of FDI-induced private industrial estates has severely widened
income gaps in Bekasi District (Hudalah & Firman, 2012).

The rise of local government: Indonesia’s transition to democratic decentralization and the
formation of International Zone
The rapid settlement transition in Cikarang in the past three decades can be partly
explained by interlinking the shifting global factors with the dynamics of domestic
institutional frameworks (Table 4). The 1997 Asian ﬁnancial crisis reminded the
manufacturing industries in Cikarang that the real competition was no longer with
neighbouring industrial estates but with new emerging periurban areas in the metropol-
itan region and other industrializing Asian countries. This tightening regional and global
competition forced the manufacturing production system in Cikarang to become more
efﬁcient.
    Furthermore, the Asian ﬁnancial crisis triggered massive student demonstrations in
Indonesia and turned into a political chaos, which was signiﬁed by the stepping down
of President Suharto and, thus, the end of the 33 years of authoritarian and centralized
rule under the New Order Regime. Following this critical juncture in 1998, the country
transformed into the largest democracy in Southeast Asia (Kimura, 2010). A series of
radical democratization policy measures was drafted, marking the beginning of era
reformasi (reform era).
    Amid the risk of national disintegration, the Indonesian government enacted the
ﬁrst law on regional administrations in 1999 after the fall of the New Order regime.
With the enactment of Law 22 of 1999 on Regional Administrations and Law 25 of
1999 on Inter-Government Financial Balance, Indonesia experimented with a radical
shift from the centralized, authoritarian regime toward a highly decentralized adminis-
trative system. This earliest version of otonomi daerah or Indonesia’s decentralization
policy was considered very ambitious. The new laws entailed the devolution of a wide
range of political powers in most policy areas at the lowest administration level or local
government, including land use planning and infrastructure development. In fact, the
local government could execute some of these policies without close consultation with
central and provincial governmental administrations and neighbouring local govern-
ments. Hence, the Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat Daerah (DPRD) or the elected local council
had more power in making laws and holding the head of local government account-
able. In particular, Law 25 of 1999 also gave local governments the power to generate


Table 4. Periurban settlement transition in Cikarang.

Transition element            Industrial estate/town          The international economic
                              (1980s–1990s)                   zone (2000s–2010s)

Global factor                 Global FDI expansion            Asian and global ﬁnancial crises
Domestic institutional        Deregulation and                Decentralization and democratization
settings                      debureaucratization
Mode of governance            Shadow government               Network governance
Instrument                    Privatization                   Public-private partnership
Scale of state intervention   National-regional               Local-regional
Scale of competition          Local                           Regional-global
Key political objective       Growth                          Sustainability
Planning policy issue         Accessibility                   Connectivity
Spatial manifestation         Enclave, splintering urbanism   Networked-enclave, bounded zone

Source: Author’s analysis.
Governing industrial estates                                                          67


local revenues through taxes, charges and fees from local businesses and its citizens
(Kimura, 2010).
    These pervasive powers as a result of the decentralization euphoria that occurred
throughout the country drove local governments to act as raja kecil (little kings) with
their own autonomous territories and citizens (Firman, 2009). As Hadiz (2004:705)
comments, ‘rather than breaking up centralized state intervention and promoting
investment, decentralization has so far opened the door to a host of uncertainties
which frighten investors’. In addition to the ones promulgated by the central
government, every autonomous region such as Bekasi Regency designed their own
local regulations and policies with respect to investment and land and property
development. These additional regulations complicated procedures and, thus,
increased uncertainties and transaction costs for industrial investment and production
in Cikarang.
    For these reasons, in 2006 Jababeka, being the largest industrial estate developer in
Cikarang, initiated the establishment of an association called Zona Internasional (ZONI)
or International (economic) Zone. ZONI is a network-based institutional arrangement,
mainly focused on creating a good environment for sustainable investment and develop-
ment acceleration in Cikarang. The initiative was supported by the central government
(the Ministry of Public Works), West Java Provincial Government, Bekasi Regency
Government, the state-own highway corporation (PT Jasa Marga) and the seven indus-
trial estates in Cikarang. Zoni can be seen as a ‘worlding practice’ (Roy & Ong, 2011),
envisioning Cikarang as an excellent and competitive industrial district in Asia
(Jababeka, 2007).
    ZONI conducted a feasibility study to propose Cikarang as a special economic zone
(SEZ). To some extent, this proposal attempted to replicate successful elements of
kaifaqu, the Chinese development zone (Hsing, 2010). The SEZ would focus on
debureacratization and investment service integration to improve the business climate
in Cikarang. Furthermore, ZONI also worked to improve the bargaining position of the
industrial estates in local, regional and national policymaking. Under ZONI, the
industrial estates attempted to enhance communication, cooperation and partnerships
with the governments. In the following section, cooperation among the industrial
estates over transport infrastructure development illustrates the challenges and pros-
pects for ZONI.


Dynamics of periurban governance
Rise of shadow government
Rimmer and Dick (2009) note that periurban governments in Southeast Asia have lim-
ited resources in the provision of infrastructure. Most roads in Cikarang can only ac-
commodate local trafﬁc such as cars and motorcycles and cannot serve heavy
vehicles such as container trucks. As a result of insufﬁcient ﬁnancial resources by the
local government, the roads in Cikarang are partly maintained and taken care of by
the government of Bekasi Regency. To make things worse, the decentralization policy
has not signiﬁcantly improved the ﬁscal condition of Bekasi Regency in general and
Cikarang in particular. Despite the fact that the area has long become the prime loca-
tion for factories, the manufacturing ofﬁces are still located in Jakarta. Consequently,
Jakarta still control the largest share of companies’ income and taxes, while Bekasi Re-
gency could only generate limited revenues from land, building, and property taxes
and permit fees.
68                                                                                       Delik Hudalah


    In fact, although Cikarang has transformed into a national manufacturing power-
house since mid-1990s, Government Regulation 26/2008 on the National Spatial
Plan continued to treat Cikarang and other periurban areas in Bekasi District merely
as a kawasan penyangga (dormitory or satellite town) with the function to support the
residential expansion of the Special Capital Province of Jakarta (DKI Jakarta). A top
ofﬁcial of Bekasi Regency Regional Development Planning Agency explained as
follows:
     The central government [still] thinks that Bekasi is a dormitory [town]. Meanwhile, [if you] try
     [to travel] from Jakarta to Cikarang in the morning, in the evening, during the weekdays, [the
     trafﬁc will always busy and] only empty in the weekend. Cikarang is different from other
     [periurban] areas surrounding Jakarta. You cannot treat Cikarang like a satellite city of Jakarta.
     Instead, we can say that the [national] economic base is in Cikarang. However, the central gov-
     ernment has not realized that (pers. comm., Cikarang, 20 March 2013).

In addition, the head of the Spatial Planning and Human Settlement Department of
Bekasi Regency emphasized that Cikarang ‘has already been called an international eco-
nomic zone yet [is] governed by a “rural” organization’ (pers. comm., Cikarang, 26
March 2013). The local government is unprepared for dealing with globally linked rapid
urbanization, because of the Indonesia’s government structure. Indonesia’s constitution
divides the governmental administration into three levels: central, provincial and local
(People’s Consultative Assembly, 2002). Local governments are divided into kota
(municipalities) and kabupaten (regencies). While kota covers an urbanized area,
kabupaten is historically occupied by predominantly rural areas. As a form of rural gov-
ernment, kabupaten does not have adequate institutional capacity to deal with globally
linked rapid urbanization.
    As also found in other Asian cities, the limited capability of local government in
responding to rapid industrialization and urbanization in the periurban fringe often
allows large private developers to play an active and exclusive role in the infrastructure
planning and development processes (Rimmer & Dick, 2009; Sood, 2015). To support
the industrial operation, developers in Cikarang built the local roads, clean water treat-
ment plants, waste water treatment plants, communication network and public trans-
portation networks inside and surrounding their project sites. Because of their capacity
in taking over the government’s tasks in providing infrastructure networks, the devel-
opers thought that they acted as a shadow government:
     It would be difﬁcult for us, for example, to invite investors to build factories but there was no
     road. They surely wouldn’t come. We, as developers, [therefore] acted as pemerintah bayangan
     [shadow government] (private developer, pers. comm., Cikarang, 6 March 2012).

In fact, the actual power of this shadow government might stretch beyond that featured
in US edge cities (Garreau, 1991). A shadow government, which can take the form of
corporate township in South Asian conception (Jenkins et al., 2015; Sood, 2015), can
be viewed as a nonelected or nonrepresentative organization that governs exclusive or
gated space and operates outside the existing structures of local and regional govern-
ments. Such an organization is formally registered and its operation is regulated; thus,
it can be distinguished from illegal organizations and criminal practices (see for
example Wilson, 2009; Aspinall & Klinken, 2011). However, in practice a shadow gov-
ernment may operate in grey policy areas where the authority and legitimacy of the local
government are not clearly speciﬁed and when local governments do not have ﬁnancial,
human and institutional capacity.
Governing industrial estates                                                             69


    Garreau’s conception of a shadow government restricts the active role of the pri-
vate sector in creating and enforcing order at the local scale within their own pro-
ject sites. Meanwhile, in Cikarang private developers extended their power into
external realms, by directing the formulation of national and local legislation and
by building parts of local and regional infrastructure networks located outside their
project sites. The industrial estate developers guided the central and local govern-
ments in drafting laws, regulations and policies to further their own business inter-
ests. Being more experienced in managing urban growth, the developers also often
pushed the regency government to adopt industrial estate regulations in the local
spatial planning policy.
    Furthermore, as also evident in the Philippines (Shatkin, 2008), large private devel-
opers in Cikarang have played an active role in realizing the global aspiration for regional
infrastructure projects. The industrial estate developers in Cikarang have always had a
common interest in shortening the distance to Jakarta, where the international seaport
and airport for export-import processing are located. The four industrial estates
improved their access to the intercity toll road, by proposing ﬁve new toll road
interchanges only 3 to 6 km apart from each other and ﬁnancing and building roads
and bridges directly connected to the interchanges (Figure 4).

Toward network governance?
Although industrial estate developers have built an excellent infrastructure network
within their own project sites, the infrastructure networks are disconnected from each
other, leading to a fragmentation of the periurban space. The situation perfectly
resembles what Graham and Marvin (2001) call the ‘splintering urbanism’. To resolve
the local infrastructure fragmentation, in 1993 the central government through the




Figure 4. A toll road interchange built by a private industrial developer in Cikarang.
Source: Photograph by author, 2013.
70                                                                                        Delik Hudalah


Industrial Estates Coordination Team initiated a handshake agreement with the provin-
cial and local governments and the industrial estate developers in Cikarang. As part of
this public-private partnership agreement, each industrial estate company was required
to build connecting roads to their neighbouring project sites and local communities.
Initially, most companies undermined this agreement. They argued that connecting
roads would generate more trafﬁc on their local roads, thus causing congestion and in-
creasing the road maintenance costs. Such an externality would only beneﬁt their
neighbouring competitors who wish to get a free and faster access to the nearest inter-
changes that connect their project locations with Jakarta.
    However, the lack of connectivity between the neighbouring industrial estates
forced regional and local trafﬁc to rely on the intercity toll road. After a decade, the
situation created congestion and bottlenecks on the toll road and its interchanges. Sev-
eral industrial estate managers in Cikarang started to worry about the impact of this
poor connectivity on land value, production efﬁciency and the attractiveness of
Cikarang as the national manufacturing centre. Furthermore, as the industrial activities
grew and the production system complexity increased, the project sites could no longer
be isolated from each other. Factories needed to better connect to their vendors that
were increasingly dispersed across neighbouring project locations. Similarly, as the
population grew, the industrial towns have increasingly specialized and neither of
them could independently provide all facilities and services required by their own
inhabitants.
    Several industrial estate managers ﬁnally saw mutual interests and reciprocal beneﬁts
for improving infrastructure connectivity in Cikarang. They also realized that poor con-
nectivity was increasingly becoming a common problem for major industrial estate
developers in Cikarang. Hence, they attempted to initiate communication by building
several communities and forums such as the President Executive Club (for professional
and business leaders), Golf Country Club (for hobbies and leisure) and ICT forum (for
engineers). They aimed to transform the embedded competition into partnership and
cooperation.

     So, in the beginning we cheated against each other, fought with each other. Each of us wanted
     to be the champion. We blocked the [connecting] road. ‘I’m sorry. I don’t want to connect [my
     road with yours]; I’m greater than you. I don’t want to share my [drinking] water [with you]’.
     Nevertheless, at last, we realized that it was not efﬁcient. Trafﬁc jam was everywhere . . . So the
     formula is, from now on, to make friends. I just realized why silaturahmi [to connect ties with
     friends] would expand our wealth. Evidently, [if we have] many friends, our business will be
     simpler. It did become simpler. Everything became cheaper . . . Therefore, we shift toward net-
     working. The current competition is between networks, not between entities . . . If we don’t
     have network, [we will be] abandoned, wassalam [goodbye] (industrial manager, pers. comm.,
     Cikarang, 20 March 2013).

   Using this networking strategy, in 2006 the industrial estate managers and the gov-
ernments renewed the partnership agreement on the infrastructure development and
improvement programmes to support the industrial activities in Cikarang. Following
the new joint agreement (Ministry of Public Works, 2006), the central government
focused on building new toll roads, ﬂyovers and bridges, and the Indonesia Highway
Corporation was given the authority to build new toll road lanes. The main roads were
the responsibility of the provincial government, while the local roads were upgraded
by the regency government. Meanwhile, most connecting roads and interchanges were
constructed by the private industrial estate companies (Figure 5).
Governing industrial estates                                                               71




Figure 5. A connecting road built through public-private partnership in Cikarang.
Source: Photograph by author, 2013.


Conclusion
In the past three decades, mega property developments in the form of industrial estates,
towns and regional infrastructure have spread across JMA’s periurban areas. The reloca-
tion of FDI on the global scale, especially in manufacturing sectors, is a major driver of
this urban expansion. Furthermore, the local spatial representation of the global
economic factor is not independent but strategically interlinked with periurban politics.
Shifts in domestic institutional settings, particularly Indonesia’s rapid transition to dem-
ocratic decentralization, have increased the signiﬁcance and the complexity of periurban
governance, which faces a key challenge of reconnecting the fragmented infrastructure
networks. The governing model of periurban infrastructure is not static and state
centred. Instead, the elements of governance, including the spatial scales, state-market
relations, mechanisms and instruments, and policy objectives are highly diverse and
dynamic.
    At least two signiﬁcant modes of governance emerge in the case study: shadow gov-
ernment and network governance. First, the private sector acted as the so-called shadow
government, in the face of limited capability of local government. My analysis implies
that even in the context of underdeveloped governmental institutions, the effectiveness
of this private governance model is limited in fostering integrated and inclusive develop-
ment and improving the competitiveness of periurban infrastructure networks.
    Second, the building of network governance that cuts across different actors and
scales could be crucial in rapidly periurbanizing metropolitan areas such as JMA. While
the government highlights the authority and coercive power of the state, network
governance consists of selected autonomous actors whose capacity in enabling collective
actions lies in social coordination and control (Jones et al., 1997). In the case of Cikarang,
interactor networking strategies seem to be helpful in reconciling the state-market
divides and resolving the global-local political contestation. The strategies may include
seeking mutual interests, reciprocal beneﬁts and common problems, and initiating
72                                                                                        Delik Hudalah


communication, cooperation and partnerships. However, because of a lack of trust, Zoni
as a private-driven institution currently ﬁnds difﬁculties in encouraging quick actions
and building long-term commitment of its members to promote sustainable urban devel-
opment. Given the limited commitment of private developers, the institutional, ﬁnancial
and human capacities of local and regional governments need to be upgraded.

Acknowledgements

The author wishes to thank Nicholas Phelps, Dimitra Viantari, Ratih Dewayanti and Ishma F.
Soepriadi for the fruitful discussions and their assistance during the ﬁeldwork for this paper. How-
ever, the author solely responsible for the content of this article.


References

Aguilar AG, Ward PM, Smith CB Sr (2003) Globalization, regional development, and mega-city
     expansion in Latin America: Analyzing Mexico City’s peri-urban hinterland. Cities 20 (1), 3–21.
Aspinall E, van Klinken G (2011) The state and illegality in Indonesia. In Aspinall E, van Klinken G
     (eds) The State and Illegality in Indonesia, 1–30. KITLV Press, Leiden. Available at: http://www.
     oapen.org/search?identiﬁer=368290 (accessed 6 April 2016).
Bevir M (2011) Governance as theory, practice, and dilemma. In Bevir M (ed) The Sage handbook of
     governance pp, 1–6. Sage, London. Available at: http://www.sagepub.in/upm-data/36847_
     Bevir_Chap_01.pdf (accessed 22 March 2016).
CCTV English (2012) Indonesia a bright spot in time of global uncertainty: WB. Available at: http://
     english.cntv.cn/20120208/117965.shtml (accessed 21 March 2012).
DiGaetano A, Strom E (2003) Comparative urban governance: an integrated approach. Urban Affairs
     Review 38 (3), 356–95.
Douglass M (2000) Mega-urban regions and world city formation: globalisation, the economic crisis
     and urban policy issues in Paciﬁc Asia. Urban Studies 37 (12), 2315–35.
East Jakarta Industrial Park (2014) Story. East Jakarta Industrial Park, Ltd., Cikarang. Available at:
     http://www.ejip.co.id/proﬁles/view/1-proﬁle.html/1 (accessed 1 November 2016).
Firman T (1998) The restructuring of Jakarta Metropolitan Area: a ‘global city’ in Asia. Cities 15 (4),
     229–43.
Firman T (2004) New Town development in Jakarta Metropolitan Region: a perspective of spatial
     segregation. Habitat International 28 (3), 349–68.
Firman T (2009) Decentralization reform and local-government proliferation in Indonesia: towards
     a fragmentation of regional development. Review of Urban & Regional Development Studies 21
     (2–3), 143–57.
Garreau J (1991) Edge City: Life on the New Frontier. Random House LLC, New York.
Graham S, Marvin S (2001) Splintering Urbanism: Networked Infrastructures, Technological Mobilities and
     the Urban Condition. Routledge, London.
Gugler J (2004) Introduction. In Gugler J (ed) World Cities Beyond the West: Globalization, Development
     and Inequality, 1–24. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Hadiz VR (2004) Decentralization and democracy in Indonesia: a critique of neo-institutionalist per-
     spectives. Development and Change 35 (4), 697–718.
Hatch W, Yamamura K (1996) Asia in Japan’s Embrace: Building a Regional Production Alliance.
     Cambridge University Press, Cambridge and New York.
Henderson JV, Kuncoro A (1996) Industrial centralization in Indonesia. The World Bank Economic
     Review 10 (3), 513–40.
Hill H (1988) Foreign Investment and Industrialization in Indonesia. Oxford University Press, Singapore.
Hill H (1990) Indonesia’s industrial transformation part II. Bulletin of Indonesian Economic Studies
     26 (3), 75–109.
Hsing Y (2010) The Great Urban Transformation: Politics of Land and Property in China. Oxford
     University Press, Oxford.
Governing industrial estates                                                                      73

Hudalah D, Firman T (2012) Beyond property: industrial estates and post-suburban transformation
     in Jakarta Metropolitan Region. Cities 29 (1), 40–8.
Hudalah D, Winarso H, Woltjer J (2007) Peri-urbanisation in East Asia: a new challenge for
     planning? International Development Planning Review 29 (4), 503–19.
Hudalah D, Viantari D, Firman T, Woltjer J (2013) Industrial land development and manufacturing
     deconcentration in Greater Jakarta. Urban Geography 34 (7), 950–71.
Hyundai Inti Development (2010) Proﬁle. Hyundai Inti Development, Ltd., Cikarang.
Indonesia Investment Coordinating Board (2014) Perkembangan Realisasi Investasi PMA Menurut
     Lokasi per Sektor [Foreign investment realization by location and sector]. Government of
     Republic of Indonesia, Jakarta.
Institut Teknologi Bandung (2012) Laporan Tahunan Program Peningkatan Nilai Tambah Mata
     Rantai Produksi melalui Pengembangan Kawasan Terpadu [Annual report of production chain
     added value enhancement programme through integrated area development]. Institut
     Teknologi Bandung, Bandung.
Jababeka (2007) ZONI: Zona internasional 7 Kawasan Industri di Cikarang, Bekasi. Jababeka, Ltd.,
     Cikarang.
Jababeka (2010) PT. Jababeka Infrastruktur. Jababeka, Ltd., Cikarang.
Jababeka (2011) Kota Jababeka Fact Sheet 2011/2012. Jababeka, Ltd., Cikarang.
Jenkins R, Kennedy L, Mukhopadhyay P, Pradhan KC (2015) Special Economic Zones in India in-
     terrogating the nexus of land, development and urbanization. Environment and Urbanization
     ASIA 6 (1), 1–7.
Jones C, Hesterly WS, Borgatti SP (1997) A general theory of network governance: exchange con-
     ditions and social mechanisms. Academy of Management Review 22 (4), 911–45.
Keivani R, Mattingly M (2007) The Interface of globalization and peripheral land in the cities of the
     South: implications for urban governance and local economic development. International Journal
     of Urban and Regional Research 31 (2), 459–74.
Kimura E (2010) Changing the rules: historical conjuncture and transition in Indonesia. Asia Paciﬁc
     Viewpoint 51 (3), 248–61.
Kuncoro M (2000) Beyond agglomeration and urbanization. Gadjah Mada International Journal of
     Business 2 (3), 307–25.
Kuncoro M, Wahyuni S (2009) FDI impacts on industrial agglomeration: the case of Java, Indonesia.
     Journal of Asia Business Studies 3 (2), 65–77.
Leisch H (2002) Gated communities in Indonesia. Cities 19 (5), 341–50.
Lindblad TJ (2008) Bridges to New Business: The Economic Decolonization of Indonesia. KITLV Press,
     Leiden.
Lippo Cikarang (2009) Annual report. Lippo Cikarang, Ltd., Bekasi.
McGee TG (1991) The emergence of Desakota regions in Asia: expanding a hypothesis. In Ginsburg
     N, Koppel B, McGee TG (eds) The Extended Metropolis: Settlement transition in Asia, 3–26.
     University of Hawaii Press, Honolulu.
Merriﬁeld A (2013) The urban question under planetary urbanization. International Journal of Urban
     and Regional Research 37 (3), 909–22.
Ministry of Public Works (2006) Joint agreement no. 05/PKS/M/2006 on road infrastructure
     development for supporting industrial areas in Cikarang-Bekasi. Ministry of Public Works,
     Cikarang.
MM2100 Industrial Town (2010) Introduction. MM20100 Industrial Town, Cikarang Barat.
     Available at: http://www.mm2100.co.id/main_company.php?id=1 (accessed 17 March 2013).
Palit A (2009) Growth of Special Economic Zones (SEZs) in India issues and perspectives. Journal of
     Infrastructure Development 1 (2), 133–52.
People’s Consultative Assembly (2002) Undang-undang Dasar Negara Republik Indonesia Tahun 1945
     [The constitution of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1945]. People’s Consultative Assembly,
     Jakarta.
Pierre J (1999) Models of urban governance the institutional dimension of urban politics. Urban
     Affairs Review 34 (3), 372–96.
74                                                                                       Delik Hudalah


Pírez P (2002) Buenos Aires: fragmentation and privatization of the metropolitan city. Environment
    and Urbanization 14 (1), 145–58.
Rimmer PJ, Dick HW (2009) The City in Southeast Asia: Patterns, Processes and Policy. NUS Press,
    Singapore.
Roy A, Ong A (2011) Worlding Cities: Asian Experiments and the Art of Being Global. John Wiley & Sons,
    West Sussex.
Shatkin G (2008) The city and the bottom line: urban megaprojects and the privatization of planning
    in Southeast Asia. Environment & Planning A 40 (2), 383–401.
Simon D (2004) The changing urban–rural interface of African cities: deﬁnitional issues and an
    application to Kumasi, Ghana. Environment and Urbanization 16 (2), 235–48.
Simon D (2008) Urban environments: issues on the peri-urban fringe. Annual Review of Environment
    and Resources 33 (1), 167–85.
Sood A (2015) Industrial townships and the policy facilitation of corporate urbanisation in India.
    Urban Studies 52 (8), 1359–78.
Stoker G (1998) Governance as theory: ﬁve propositions. International Social Science Journal 50 (155),
    17–28.
Tambunan T (2008) Trade liberalization effects on the development of small and medium-sized en-
    terprises in Indonesia: a case study. Asia Paciﬁc Development Journal 15 (2), 35–59.
The Government of the Republic of Indonesia (1989) Keputusan Presiden Nomor 53 Tahun 1989
    tentang Kawasan Industri [Presidential Decree No. 53/1989 on industrial estate]. Pemerintah
    Republik Indonesia, Jakarta.
The Indonesia Central Bureau of Statistics (2005) Proﬁl 7 Kawasan Industri [Proﬁle of industrial estate
    in Cikarang]. The Indonesia Central Bureau of Statistics, Cikarang.
The Indonesia Central Bureau of Statistics (2014) Kabupaten Bekasi dalam Angka [Bekasi Regency in
    ﬁgures]. The Indonesia Central Bureau of Statistics, Cikarang. Available at: http://bekasikab.bps.
    go.id/linkTableDinamis/view/id/9 (accessed 13 January 2016).
Urata S (1993) Japanese foreign direct investment and its effect on foreign trade in Asia. In Ito T,
    Krueger AO (eds) Trade and Protectionism, NBER-EASE Volume 2, 273–304. University of Chicago
    Press, Chicago.
Webster D (2002) On the Edge: Shaping the Future of Peri-urban East Asia. Asia/Paciﬁc Research Center,
    Stanford. Available at: https://fsi.fsi.stanford.edu/sites/default/ﬁles/Webster2002.pdf (accessed
    13 January 2016).
Wei YD, Leung CK (2005) Development zones, foreign investment, and global city formation in
    Shanghai. Growth and Change 36 (1), 16–40.
West Java Provincial Government (2010) Masterplan Kawasan Ekonomi Khusus Indonesia di
    Kabupaten Bekasi [Masterplan of Special Economic Zone in Bekasi District]. Bandung, West
    Java Provincial Government.
Wie TK (1991) The surge of Asian NIC investment into Indonesia. Bulletin of Indonesian Economic
    Studies 27 (3), 55–88.
Wilson E (2009) Deconstructing the shadows. In Wilson E, Lindsey T (eds) Government of the
    Shadows: Parapolitics and Criminal Sovereignty, 13–55. Pluto Press, New York.
Winarso H, Firman T (2002) Residential land development in Jabotabek, Indonesia: triggering eco-
    nomic crisis? Habitat International 26 (4), 487–506.
