[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: journal/J18-firman-2008-in-search-of-a-governance-institution-model-for-jakarta-metropolitan-area-jma-under-indonesias-new-decentralisation-policy-old-problems-new-challenges-10.1002-pad.504.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Title:           In search of a governance institution model for Jakarta Metropolitan Area (JMA) under Indonesia's new decentralisation policy: old problems, new challenges
Author:          
Creator:         John Wiley
Producer:        PDFlib PLOP 2.0.0p6 (SunOS)/Acrobat Distiller 5.0 (Windows)
CreationDate:    Tue Sep 23 13:38:07 2008 WIB
ModDate:         Fri Sep 26 15:40:58 2008 WIB
Custom Metadata: yes
Metadata Stream: yes
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            none
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           11
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       567 x 737 pts
Page rot:        0
File size:       181377 bytes
Optimized:       yes
PDF version:     1.3
[Extracted Text]
                                       public administration and development
                                                  Public Admin. Dev. 28, 280–290 (2008)
                                                  Published online in Wiley InterScience
                                            (www.interscience.wiley.com) DOI: 10.1002/pad.504




IN SEARCH OF A GOVERNANCE INSTITUTION MODEL FOR JAKARTA
      METROPOLITAN AREA (JMA) UNDER INDONESIA’S NEW
 DECENTRALISATION POLICY: OLD PROBLEMS, NEW CHALLENGES
                                                      TOMMY FIRMAN*
                                             Institute of Technology, Bandung, Indonesia


                                                             SUMMARY
This study explores a possible governance model for Jakarta Metropolitan Area (JMA) under Indonesia’s new Decentralisation
Policy. At present the management of JMA development is coordinated by Badan Koordinasi Pembangunan Jabodetabekjur
(BKSP) —Coordinating Board for JMA Development, but this agency is ineffective and powerless to perform its tasks because
of lack of authority and power. The establishment of JMA governance model should take into account the existence of the BKSP
which has been politically accepted by all provincial and local governments in the region. Involvement of central government in
JMA governance is very important. A mixed model of urban governance is most suitable for the JMA. Thereunder the central
government should have authority to plan and develop major physical infrastructure for the whole JMA, while the provincial and
local governments retain their respective general administrative functions. Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

key words — Governance; decentralisation policy; Jakarta Metropolitan Area



                                                      INTRODUCTION
This study is concerned with a governance model for Jakarta Metropolitan Area (JMA), the largest concentration of
urban population and economic activity in Indonesia. It is not a new issue, but under Indonesia’s new
decentralisation policy the challenges for urban governance are even more daunting. This policy has made the local
governments in the JMA socio-economically and politically fragmented as has happened in other large cities in
Indonesia. Metropolitan regions are usually characterised by both externalities and socio-economic, environmental
and political administrative interdependences among local government jurisdictions in the region (Bird and Slack,
2007, p. 736).
   The study will examine options for metropolitan governance in the JMA. The questions addressed in this study
are the extent to which regional autonomy and fiscal decentralisation reform have affected the development of JMA
and the kind of metropolitan governance institutions that need to be established for a competitive and effective JMA
development in the future.Cheema (www.arabgov-initiative.org/publications/public service/cheema.pdf) defines
governance broadly as:
  The system of values, policies and institutions which a society manages its economic, political and social affairs
  through interactions within and among the state, civil society and private sector. It is how a society organises
  itself to make and implement decisions, mediate differences, and exercise legal rights and obligations, [and]
  comprises the rules, institutions, and practices that set limits and provide incentives (pp. 3–4).


   Governance is much more complex than government. According to the UNDP (2002), governance as a concept
recognises that power exists inside and outside the formal authority and institutions of government, including civil

*Correspondence to: T. Firman, Research Group on Regional and Rural Development Planning, School of Architecture, Planning and Policy
Development, Institute of Technology, Bandung, Indonesia Bandung 40132 Indonesia. E-mail: tfirman@melsa.net.id



Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
                                    IN SEARCH OF A GOVERNANCE MODEL FOR JMA                                           281

society and the private sector, and that decisions are made based on the complex relationships between many
stakeholders with different interests and priorities. In contrast, government refers to specific institutions or entities
that deliver services to certain geographical areas according to its functions, as stated in the constitutions of each
state (pp. 13; see also Shah, 2005).
   One of the objectives of governance is to promote vibrant and environmentally sustainable communities.
According to Freire (2007) there are two great challenges in urban and regional governance. The first of these is
competitiveness, economically. The second is the quality of a life which is an important element of
competitiveness.
   Reform of urban and regional governance institutions is absolutely critical to sustainable development. Stubbs
and Clarke (1996, 93) maintain that what is needed for institutional improvement of extended metropolitan areas is
the development of new forms of coordination and the resolution of metropolitan policy issues at the macro and
micro levels which traditional local governments cannot provide alone.
   According to Montgomery et al. (2004, 407) the key institutional challenges in urban governance include
the allocation and distribution of authority; capacity development; financial improvement, notably on local
revenue generation; and dealing with issues of inequality. However, as Prud’homme (1996,123) argues, ‘the more
democratic the country, the more difficult it is to make local government work together as they have equal political
legitimacy, while the leaders want to satisfy their own constituents in order to be elected.’
   The Indonesian Parliament passed Law 22/1999 and 25/1999 concerning regional autonomy and fiscal
decentralisation in May 1999. These laws are aimed primarily at curbing separatist sentiments in the outlying
provinces of Indonesia. At the end of 1990s and early 2000 these could have potentially broken up Indonesia into
several small tiny countries. Both legislations were then amended in 2004 and became Law 32/2004 and 33/2004
respectively but this did not change the main objectives.
   The essence of Indonesia’s decentralisation policy reform is a shift of several government functions,
responsibilities, and tasks from central to local government, in which the local government, including Provincial,
Districts (Kabupaten) and Municipalities (Kota), will have a greater role in several important functions. Therefore,
the reform could potentially change the pattern of urban and regional development and governance (see Firman,
2003).
   Indonesia’s Law of Development Planning System (Law 25/2004) and Law of Regional Government (Law 32/
2004) do not explicitly stipulate procedures for Metropolitan planning and management. Nevertheless, at present
the management of development of the JMA is coordinated by the BKSP (Badan Koordinasi Pembangunan
Jabodetabekjur —a Coordinating Board for the JMA Development) established in 1975. However, this agency
seems to be powerless to perform its functions, owing to lack of authority (see Dharmapatni and Firman, 1995). The
problem becomes even worse in the context of decentralisation, as the real power rests local governments in
the JMA. This region is politically and administratively very fragmented, just as in many other Asian countries (see
also Laquian, 2005b).
   The main part of this article is divided into five parts. Part one discusses decentralisation and metropolitan
governance to provide a conceptual framework for the study; part two describes the characteristics and current
development of the JMA; part three examines Indonesia’s new policy on decentralisation and its impacts on JMA’s
development; part four critically assesses the need for possible governance institutions for the JMA.

    DECENTRALISATION, REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT, AND METROPOLITAN GOVERNANCE
Owing to the failure of centralised planning for economic development, many developing countries have started in
the 1970’s to decentralise responsibility for socioeconomic development, planning and management to local
agencies and local government (Freire and Stern, 2001; Freire, 2007).
   There is no single framework for decentralisation portable between countries. This is owing to contextual
differences in each terms of the local politics, history, geography, culture and socioeconomic. Experience shows
that a decentralisation policy can be successfully implemented only if it is clearly defined and if its scope is limited
to reallocating functions among units of the central government (Cheema and Rondinelli, 1983, 296).

Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                              Public Admin. Dev. 28, 280–290 (2008)
                                                                                                          DOI: 10.1002/pad
282                                                  T. FIRMAN


    Decentralisation also has to be implemented with caution, otherwise it risks undermining its own goals. As Azis
(2003) argues in the context of Indonesia, the greatest risk of decentralisation is perhaps the vulnerability of local
government to capture by local elites and collusion amongst and corruption by local interest groups. These are
usually stronger at local than that at national levels.
    Vogel (2005) maintains that the development of large metropolitan regions in the world has raised issues and
concerns about how to manage them in a democratic and effective way. Especially critical is the challenge of how to
structure local and regional government to ensure effective metropolitan planning, coordination and development.
Decentralisation implies that the capacity of metropolitan governments needs to be strengthened and should be
carefully managed. Talukder (2006, 71–102) proposes several principles for metropolitan governance in
developing countries: a geographical area that covers the extended metropolitan region; a coordination mechanism
to ensure the integration between planning and development; and strong links to the national government system in
order to obtain political support.
    As Laquian (1995, 239) maintains, the governance of metropolitan regions is expected to result in the meeting of
four requirements of the better quality of urban life. These are: (1) efficiency in the delivery of urban services;
(2) equity in the urban society; (3) economic development and (4) environmental sustainability. As Laquian further
argues, there are four types of metropolitan governance arrangements: (1) autonomous local governance in which
authority lies with local government—for planning, policy making, and the execution of government functions;
(2) confederated regional governance in which several local governments make cooperative arrangements on
several area-wide functions to be executed at metropolitan level, but they retain local authority, such as the Metro-
Manila Development Authority; (3) a mixed system of regional governance in which national and provincial
government share powers with local governments in the implementation of public functions, such as the Bangkok
Metropolitan Administration; and (4) unified regional governance in which the whole metropolitan or mega-urban
region is under a jurisdiction of one single governing institution (Laquian, 1995:223–224).(See also Laquian,
2005b, 2008; Montgomery et al., 2004, Chapter 9, pp. 355–409).
    Bird and Slack (2007, 731–736) outline additional dimensions of metropolitan governance: one-tier and two-tier
authorities; voluntary cooperation and special-purpose districts.
    The one-tier model can take two forms, a series of small fragmented municipalities in a metropolitan region and
a large consolidated municipality for the whole region. The latter is formed either by amalgamation or annexation.
The two-tier model consists of an upper tier governing agency, covering a large geographical region and a lower
level tier of municipalities. The voluntary cooperation model refers to wide area agency formed on the basis of
voluntary cooperation between the local governments with no permanent institutional status. Special or single-
purpose districts are often used to deliver services that cut across various municipal boundaries.
    Canada is an example of a country which has practiced various types of metropolitan governance over the past
50 years (Sancton, 2005, 319), including: annexations/mergers of one municipal government into a metropolitan
area (Calgary and Halifax); two-tier metropolitan government (Winnipeg); amalgamation of two-tier metropolitan
systems into a single municipality (Toronto and Ottawa); de-amalgamation of Quebec’s metropolitan areas,
including Montreal and the creation of flexible and innovative entities for metropolitan governance (regional
districts in British Columbia).
    According to Prud’homme (1996,97–129), metropolitan governance involves three levels of coordination. First,
there is internal coordination, that is, coordination between the public and private sectors, between formal and
informal mechanisms, and between politicians and professionals. Second, there is vertical coordination, which
includes central government interventions and division of tasks. Third, there is horizontal coordination, which
includes metropolitan-wide interventions and mechanisms. Nevertheless, territorial metropolitan governance in
many Asian countries is often characterised by vertical and horizontal conflicts (see Friedmann, 1999).
    As argued, there is no single ideal model for a good urban governance. It should be tailored to particular
socioeconomic and political contexts, but flexible enough to adapt itself to rapid socioeconomic changes (OECD,
2000; DiGaetano and Storm, 2003; Mossberger, 2007). Some Asian countries have implemented structural
governance reform by establishing a unified governance system or two-level and multi-level metropolitan
structures. These are often resisted by local governments, who might have to cede some of their prerogatives to the

Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                            Public Admin. Dev. 28, 280–290 (2008)
                                                                                                        DOI: 10.1002/pad
                                    IN SEARCH OF A GOVERNANCE MODEL FOR JMA                                       283

metropolitan authority, especially over financial matters. Likewise, national government agencies are also reluctant
to release their power and responsibilities to a new authority (Laquian, 2005a: 307–308 & 311). Nevertheless, the
two-tier model of metropolitan governance is the most popular because it is considered as having an inherent logic
that helps to resolve conflicts within local government (Williams, 1999, p. 172).
   Having experienced ineffective implementation of two- and multi-tiered metropolitan governance, some
metropolitan areas in Asia have been put under a unified government structure with jurisdiction over large city
regions. These include Tokyo, Beijing, Seoul, Osaka and Tianjin, where the jurisdictional boundaries had been
expanded to incorporate cities, town and villages on their periphery. Metropolitan- wide public services include
transport, water and sewerage disposal (Laquian, 2005a,310). In fact, unified metropolitan governance has resulted
in positive effects and impacts on metropolitan governance. An example is Tokyo Metropolitan Authority which
had managed to formulate, adopt and implement a comprehensive development plan for the City of Tokyo and the
peripheral areas (Laquian, 2005a, 311).



                                       JAKARTA METROPOLITAN AREA
The Jakarta-Metropolitan Area (JMA) comprises 10 administrative units at different levels. First, there is the
Jakarta Special Region (DKI Jakarta), which has provincial government level status. Second, there are eight
municipalities (Kota) and districts (Kabupaten), namely the municipalities of Bogor, Depok, Tangerang and
Bekasi, and the districts of Bogor, Tangerang, Bekasi and Cianjur. The districts and municipalities of Bogor,
Depok, Bekasi and Cianjur are within the jurisdiction of Provincial Government of West Java, whereas the districts
and municipality of Tangerang belong to the Provincial Government of Banten, which is a new Province that
separated from the Province of West Java in the early 2000s (Figure 1). The total population of JMA was about
19 million in 2004, while the population of Jakarta City was about 8.4 million.
    The JMA has been the most attractive area for both domestic and foreign investments in Indonesia, owing to its
concentration of skilled labour, entrepreneurs and a large market (Firman et al., 2007). The cumulative approved
foreign investment in manufacturing, finance and other sectors in Jakarta City had reached US $16,759.3 billion
over the period from 2000 to 2005 (CBS, 2006), which accounted for nearly one-fourth of total approved foreign
investment in Indonesia at this time. Economic activities in the JMA were hit hardest during the economic crisis at
the end of 1990s and early 2000s, resulting in closures of manufacturing, banking, property and service firms and a
great contraction in the rate of economic growth. However, the JMA’s economic situation has now been much
improved.
    Jakarta City had a Gross Regional Domestic Product (GRDP) as much as Rp. 61,736.5 billion in 2004. This
makes Jakarta’s GRDP/capita nearly Rp. 7 million, which is equivalent to US $ 689 (Table 1). The rate of economic
growth of cities and districts in the JMA ranged from 4.7 to 6.3% per annum over the period of 2001–2004, whereas
the JMA’s total annual rate of economic growth reached 5.1% over the period 2000–2003 (Alisjahbana, 2007). It is
one of the major metropolitan areas (a kind of ‘global city’) in Southeast Asian (Firman, 1998).
    It should be borne in mind that the JMA is situated in a watershed, with two main rivers, Ciliwung and Cisadane.
This has implications for coordinated management. Most of the areas in the JMA face water shortages in the dry
season and floods in the rainy season. It should also be noted that the primary and secondary forest areas, paddy
fields, gardens and estates in the south of the JMA (Bogor-Puncak and Cianjur) declined substantially over the
period 1994–2001. About 8,000 hectares of forests were converted for residential and other uses. This in turn had
resulted in negative environmental impacts in the area, including severe flooding in Jakarta City during the rainy
season, and soil erosion, subsidence and landslides in many parts of the JMA.
    The JMA can physically be divided into three areas (Soegijoko et al., 2007). First, there are the predominantly
urban areas, i.e. those which have been socio-economically and physically incorporated into the core of Jakarta
City. Second, there are the semi-urban areas, i.e. the areas dominated by large land-consuming activities, including
large-scale housing areas and industrial estates. Third, there are potential urban areas where early land conversion
takes place.

Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                          Public Admin. Dev. 28, 280–290 (2008)
                                                                                                      DOI: 10.1002/pad
284                                                                T. FIRMAN




Figure 1. Jabotabek region provinces: (1) DKI Jakarta province; (2) Banten province: (i) Tangerang district and (ii) Tangerang municipality;
(3) West Java province: (i) Bogor district, (ii) Bogor municipality, (iii) Bekasi district and (iv) Bekasi municipality. Source: Rustiadi, 2007. This
                               figure is available in colour online at www.interscience.wiley.com/journal/pad




Table 1. Gross regional domestic products (GRDP) of districts (kabupaten) and city (kotas) in Jakarta Metropolitan Area, 2004
Area                                GRDP                       Annual rate of GRDP              Number of population             GRDP/Capita
                         (in billion rupiah) in 2004         growth 2001–2004 (in %)            in 2005 (in thousand)         (in million rupiah)

Jakarta city                        61,736.5                              5.26                           8,839.2                     6,984.4
Bogor district                      21,889.6                              4.69                           3,829.0                     5,716.7
Bekasi district                     37,658.4                              5.34                           1,983.8                    18,983.0
Tangerang district                  15,094.1                              5.18                           3,259.1                     4,361.4
Cianjur district                     6,567.8                              5.01                           2,079.8                     3,157.9
Bogor city                           3,361.6                              5.91                             891.5                     3,770.7
Depok city                           4,333.8                              6.17                           1,374.9                     3,152.1
Tangerang city                      20,150.1                              5.41                           1,451.6                    13,881.3
Bekasi city                          9,069.5                              5.84                           1,993.5                     4,559.5
Source: Central board of statistics, 2006.


Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                                                  Public Admin. Dev. 28, 280–290 (2008)
                                                                                                                                 DOI: 10.1002/pad
                                    IN SEARCH OF A GOVERNANCE MODEL FOR JMA                                            285

  DECENTRALISATION POLICY IN INDONESIA AND ITS IMPACT ON URBAN AND REGIONAL
                              DEVELOPMENT IN JMA
Decentralisation is not a new idea in Indonesia. It has been in vogue (though more as a slogan) since 1945. As far as
urban and regional development in Indonesia is concerned, decentralisation is needed for the effective and efficient
provision of infrastructure and public services. Until very recently, this task has been largely the responsibility of
central government which was often poorly organised. This resulted in ineffective and inefficient provision of
services that have not necessarily met local needs. Moreover, the dominance of central government over these
functions has weakened the local authorities’ ability to provide infrastructure and services to the local communities
(Firman, 2003; see also Rondinelli, 1990, pp. 6–7).
   As of early 2008, progress of decentralisation implementation has been patchy. Some local governments have
performed better in fulfilling local development management, notably in public service provision, while others
have done even worse. This has been particularly where officials are involved in corruption and bribery. It should
also be noted that the division of functions between central and local government is still unclear. This makes the
progress of decentralisation implementation in Indonesia slow (see also Brodjonegoro, 2006). Only in the mid-
2007 did the government launch Government Regulation (Peraturan Pemerintah) no. 38 covering the division of
governmental responsibilities between central, provincial and local government.
   The new regional autonomy and fiscal decentralisation laws have the potential for making urban and regional
development in Indonesia, including in the JMA, more locally managed. This would imply both planning and
implementation according to local needs by local authorities and communities. This has created great expectancy
on the part of many local governments over what they believe are now their new found ‘kingdoms of authority’,
with resources available at their exclusive disposal, without need to consider the larger areas in which the
Kabupaten and Kota are located. The challenge is however that they do not know precisely how to use these new
found regional development resources, especially for improving public service provision.
   As Azis (2003,2) maintains, ‘letting the local government do their own planning and development in a
decentralised system could undermine the potential economic externalities’ which in turn could be
counterproductive to the original objectives of decentralisation (p. 2). As has happened in many other Kabupaten
and Kota in Indonesia, the new decentralisation policy has brought about a tendency of local government in the
JMA to exploit local resources more intensively, including land, water and other physical assets, in order to
maximise their own income (Pendapatan Asli Daerah - PAD). Kabupaten Bogor and Cianjur, for instance, continue
to allow developers to develop the temperate and beautiful scenic area of Puncak Strip (Jalur Puncak) for tourist
resorts, villa and residential areas, despite the fact the area has been designated as a conservation area due to its role
in water supply. Indeed the local governments receive some financial benefits from development permits granted to
the developers. However there is a danger of this attitude in turn bringing negative environmental consequences for
the downstream areas, notably Jakarta City—that is, flooding in the rainy season and water scarcity in the dry
season. Moreover, as Azis (2003, 5) argues, in some regions, including in the JMA, limited PAD, excessive charges
imposed by the local government to raise revenue have resulted in a burden on the private sector, which in turn
could weaken the economic competitiveness of the regions.
   During the Suharto era (1966–1997), this was not a problem, because the powerful central government could
take over and create a political solution to the problem. The provincial and local government simply obeyed and
implemented the central government’s decision without complaint. Now, the situation is completely changed, as the
local government has its own power to decide on what and how to develop their own region almost without central
and provincial government intervention.
   Under the new law on Fiscal Decentralisation, the annual local government revenues, including those in the
JMA, will consist of an equalisation grant from the General Allocation Funds (Dana Alokasi Umum—DAU,
Table 2). This will substitute for the central government grants, most notably Presidential Decree Grants of the past,
natural resources utilisation revenues, notably fisheries, forest products and oil and gases; a revenue sharing income
from land and building taxes and employee taxes; own income (Pendapatan Asli Daerah—PAD); and a special
allocation fund (Dana Alokasi Khusus—DAK) to be granted by the central government to any districts on the basis


Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                               Public Admin. Dev. 28, 280–290 (2008)
                                                                                                           DOI: 10.1002/pad
286                                                  T. FIRMAN


Table 2. General allocation fund (DAU) and gross domestic regional product (PDRB) of local governments in Jakarta
Metropolitan Area (JMA), 2001–2006 (billion rupiah)
Local Gov.                                                  DAU                                                 PDRB

                                      2001                  2003                    2006                         2000

Jakarta city                          773.0                 734.9                   768.1                     189,075.4
Bekasi city                           211.6                 256.5                   420.3                       8,875.6
Bogor city                            168.7                 197.4                   302.5                       2,671.6
Depok city                            167.2                 209.5                   313.2                       3,489.1
Bekasi district                       235.4                 231.2                   284.9                      30,267.2
Bogor district                        479.6                 517.1                   807.6                      10,597.8
Cianjur district                      335.6                 389.8                   675.9                       5,221.6
Tangerang district                    313.1                 367.0                   508.0                      12,196.8
Karawang district                     220.0                 328.0                   532.1                       7,314.9


of special need. The local governments receive the total amount of the grant from the central government based on
the ‘fiscal gap’, that is, the difference between estimated expenditure and revenue capacity. The essence of this new
fund transfer is basically in the equalisation grant (DAU) which is aimed at helping reduce central–local financial
imbalances. It is basically an unconditional block grant given to the local government which can be utilised
according to local needs without the intervention of central government. At present, DAU and income sharing
revenue constitute between 70 and 80% of local government revenue in Indonesia. Obviously natural resource rich
districts get high income sharing and perhaps much more than they need, but poor districts only get lower income
transfers.

  THE NEED FOR A JMA GOVERNANCE INSTITUTION: OLD PROBLEMS, NEW CHALLENGES
The JMA is a compact urban region that should be managed as an inseparable region through an integrated spatial
development plan (Rencana Tata Ruang). This would ensure the sustainable development of the region, even
though it consists of Kabupaten and Kota that have their own planning powers. In the current era of regional
autonomy and decentralisation, coordination seems to be a much more complicated matter and difficult to do. What
is needed is thus good collective leadership of local government, including West Java, Banten and Jakarta
Provincial government, as well as the central government. They should have a shared vision how to develop the
region through the cooperation of all stakeholders, and clear policies for the institutional development of the JMA.
   The JMA needs to improve its competitiveness as a ‘Global City’ in Asia. The biggest challenge is how to
establish an appropriate governance mechanism which can optimise the potential of this metropolitan area. Laquian
(2008, 19) argues that inclusive mega-urban region development can be achieved:
(a) by closely integrating rural and urban areas within the mega-urban region;
(b) by including all levels of local government in the city region in planned development and governance schemes;
    and
(c) by integrating all urban infrastructure and services in area-wide networks (p. 19).


   General Ali Sadikin was the first to propose the regional development of Jakarta and its surrounding areas in the
early 1970s (Silver, 2008). Subsequently, Jakarta’s former Governor General Sutiyoso reiterated the need for the
development of an integrated ‘Megalopolitan Jabodetabekjur’ covering Jakarta City, Bogor City, Depok City,
Bekasi City, Tangerang City, Bogor District, Bekasi District, Tangerang District and Cianjur District as a solution to
regional development problems in the area. General Sutiyoso raised this issue at the same time as the National
Legislature (Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat—DPR) was debating the revision of Law 34/1999 concerning the Jakarta
Special Capital District (Daerah Khusus Ibukota Jakarta). As a result, officials and local leaders in West Java and

Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                            Public Admin. Dev. 28, 280–290 (2008)
                                                                                                        DOI: 10.1002/pad
                                    IN SEARCH OF A GOVERNANCE MODEL FOR JMA                                            287

Banten Provinces vigourously challenged the idea. They accused Sutiyoso of having the intent to expand the
jurisdictional Jakarta area and encroach on some areas in Bogor–Tangreang–Bekasi–Cianjur. This, it was suggested
was with an eye to the position of Minister for the JMA Development in the future. Whilst personal ambition may
have been a factor, his idea is worth considering. In fact, some local governments, including Districts (Kabupaten)
Bogor, Tangerang and Bekasi and Kota (municipality) Bogor, Tangerang and Depok support Sutiyoso’s idea, as
they feel neglected by the Provincial Government of West Java and Banten (Zulkaidi, 2006). West Java’s provincial
government objected to Sutiyoso’s idea because if Kabupaten Bogor, Bekasi and Cianjur and City of Bogor, Bekasi
and Depok are surrended to the authority of the JMA, they could potentially lose income (PAD) by as much as
Rp. 12 trillion per year.
   The authoritarian central government of the Soeharto era was reluctant to give authority to the provincial and
local governments for fear of losing control over provincial and local governments. This was even more so for the
Provincial Governments of Jakarta, West Java, Banten, and the local governments in the areas constituting the JMA,
where the central government is housed, because the central government wanted to have as much control over the
area as possible. In fact, in the past, urban and regional development in JMA was greatly under the control and
direction of the central government through presidential grant allocation (Inpres) and ministerial programs
(Firman, 2003). This is one of the reasons why the capacity of the provincial and local governments in the JMA has
been so weak in dealing with local urban and regional development.
   BKSP (Cooperating Body of JMA Development) is a jointly established body by the Provincial Government of
West Java and the Special Capital Government of Jakarta in 1975. Its tasks are to coordinate plan, implement and
monitor development in the JMA. The establishment of BKSP was then reinforced by the Decree of Ministry of
Internal Affairs No. 29 in 1980, and later by the Decree No 125 of Ministery of National Planning and Head of
National Planning Agency in 1984. This institution is headed jointly by the Governors of West Java, Banten and
Jakarta, but day-to-day operations are managed by an executive secretary appointed by Governments of West Java,
Banten and Jakarta for 5 years in rotation. Membership of the BKSP consists of the Governor of the provincial
government and heads of district government (Bupati) and heads of municipalities (Walikota) within the JMA.
   The BKSP has now become a forum of coordination among the provincial and local governments in the JMA
including the Provincial Government of West Java, Banten and Jakarta; the city government (Pemerintah Kota) of
Bogor, Tangerang, Bekasi and Depok; all municipalities within Provincial Goverment of Jakarta and the District
Governments (Pemerintah Kabupaten) of Bogor, Tangerang, Bekasi dan Cianjur. Uniquely, however, BKSP does not
have any authority over the implementation of development in the JMA. The authority lies with each provincial and
local government in the area. This makes BKSP powerless and ineffective in coordinating development programmes
in the JMA. Further, BKSP does not have its own staff and financial resources, as it is greatly dependent on
contributions from the Provincial Governments of Jakarta, West Java and Banten. BKSP has four divisions: (1)
development division, in charge of spatial planning, housing and infrastructure; (2) economic division dealing with
transportation, small and medium enterprises, manufacturing, trade, mining and investment; (3) government and
public welfare division, in charge of population, safety and security, health, education and manpower; (4) general
(internal) division, dealing with financial and programming matters, facilities and the BKSP employees.
   There is a growing need to set up a body that can plan, coordinate and supervise the implementation of a
development programme for the JMA across provincial and local jurisdictional boundaries in a more effective way.
BKSP might not be able to effectively perform such a formidable task.
   Establishing a single authority for the JMA would involve three Provincial governments and eight local
governments, including four Districts and four municipalities, just like the Tokyo Metropolitan Area (Laquian, 2005a
and Vogel, 2005). This seems to be out of the question at present due to strong political tensions especially among the
provincial governments. These tensions might be counterproductive to the purpose of undertaking a more integrated
and coordinated approach to JMA development. The Law of Regional Government (Law 32/2004 opens up the
possibilities of mergers for the whole or part of the region as well as the proliferation of districts and municipalities.
The establishment of a single authority for the JMA could mean that the Legislature (DPR) has to cancel all local
government establishments in the JMA and then pass the law of establishment the authority. Obviously, this would not
be a feasible solution to the problem, because it could raise many complaints, strong resistance from several parties,

Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                               Public Admin. Dev. 28, 280–290 (2008)
                                                                                                           DOI: 10.1002/pad
288                                                  T. FIRMAN


especially from the provincial governments of West Java and Banten and key stakeholders such as the local elites and
communities at large, and might potentially create tensions and conflicts amongst the same.
    Another option is to establish a two-tier regional municipality, with executive and legislative functions. A model
here would be Greater Vancouver in Canada in which the metropolitan area is headed by a Mayor who has to
work with a regional municipality council consisting of directly elected councils and representatives of
each municipality’s council (see Laquian, 2005a; Zulkaidi, 2006). Whilst it works well for the Greater
Vancouver, it might not necessarily work for the JMA simply because the Indonesian law of Regional Government
(Law 32/2004) does not recognise such a regional municipality system.
    The establishment of a JMA governance mechanism should nevertheless take into account the existence of the
BKSP. This has been politically accepted by all the provincial and local governments in the region. Moreover, the
recently promulgated Law 29/2007 regarding the status of Jakarta as the Capital of the Unitary State of Indonesia,
stipulates that the Provincial Governments of Jakarta, West Java and Banten along with the local governments
bordering with Jakarta City can cooperate under an interregional cooperating body. This is established on the basis
of agreement among them (article 27). The law also explicitly states that the cooperation should be primarily
focused on planning, utilising and controlling spatial development (Tata Ruang) for Jakarta City and its
surrounding areas (JMA), which should be coordinated by the central government through related ministries,
including Ministry of Public Works, the National Planning Agency and Ministry of Internal Affairs (article 29).
    Given the complexity of the JMA’s problems, the functions of any effective governance mechanism should
emphasise common development tasks, most notably transport system, spatial development (tata ruang),
watershed planning and implementation and solid waste management.
    Involvement of the central government in the JMA’s governance will be very important, not the least because
Jakarta is the national capital. According to Einsiedel (1999) national capital territory management will need a
voice at the highest level of government (pp. 135–136; see also Stubbs and Clarke, 1996, p. 93 and Talukder, 2006,
p. 104). Second, infrastructure development in the JMA will need huge financial resources, beyond the capabilities
of all provincial and local governments in the metropolitan area. Therefore, the most suitable governance model for
JMA is a mixed model, in which central, provincial and local governments play very important roles in the
governance of the region, in line with Law 29/2007. However, the establishment of the BKSP as a mixed approach
to JMA governance would be most effective if it is given a proper legal framework (undang-undang). This approach
would also be more in line with the principle of subsidiarity. Thereunder, the stress on finding the level of
government best suited to undertake certain functions, bearing in mind the need for more transparency and
accountability to stakeholder interests, particularly the NGO and private sectors.
    The BKSP should be given the authority to plan and develop major physical infrastructure for the whole, notably
transportation systems, spatial development, watershed management, and solid waste management, while the
provincial and local governments need to cede their authority over the above functions. However they should still
retain their authority over local government administration. This would imply that the BKSP, as a metropolitan
authority, will need central government involvement in it. It should be in-charge only of planning, implementation and
monitoring of major JMA infrastructure development. This does not mean the creation of new level of government.
Rather it enhances the power of the BKSP within the corridor allowed by the new Law of Regional Government and
Law of Status of Jakarta as the National Capital to assure overall development plan coherence and relevance to the
JMA (for comparison see also Talukder, 2006 , Laquian, 2005a). With new law on fiscal decentralisation, the
provincial governments of Jakarta, West Java and Banten and 11 local governments in the JMA are supposed to have
more financial resources from the central government to help finance BKSP activities.With regard to other local
government administration functions, the BKSP should only conduct coordination, as the real authority remains with
the local government. This means that the BKSP should be headed by a central government officer.


                                                CONCLUSIONS
This study has explored the options for a governance institution for the JMA. Admittedly it is not a new issue, but in
Indonesia’s new era of decentralisation policy the challenges are even greater. Now every local government in

Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                            Public Admin. Dev. 28, 280–290 (2008)
                                                                                                        DOI: 10.1002/pad
                                      IN SEARCH OF A GOVERNANCE MODEL FOR JMA                                                  289

Indonesia, including in the JMA, has their own discretion in deciding policy and implementation of urban and
regional development in their area. They are no longer required to enter into consultation with the neighbouring
local governments and provincial governments. The JMA is a compact urban region that should be managed under
an effective metropolitan governance institution to ensure the sustainable development of the region. There is a
strong case for an effective governance mechanism for the JMA to improve the competitiveness of this metropolitan
area as a ‘Global City’ in Asia.
   Indonesia’s decentralisation policy reform is intended to shift several government functions, responsibilities and
tasks from the central to the local government domain. The policy has encouraged local governments of the JMA to
exploit local resources even more intensively, including land, water and other physical assets in order to maximise
their own income (Pendapatan Asli Daerah), without giving consideration to the socioeconomic and political
conditions of the region. This could in turn discourage investment in the JMA.
   As indicated earlier, the present management of development of the JMA is coordinated by BKSP—
a Coordinating Board for JMA Development established in 1975. However, this agency is simply ineffective and
powerless to perform its tasks, because of lack of authority. The establishment of a JMA governance structure
nevertheless needs to take into account the existence of the BKSP which has been accepted by all the provincial and
local governments in the region. This is also a parallel in the Law 29/2007 regarding the status of Jakarta as the
Capital of the Unitary State of Indonesia. This emphasises the need for a cooperation between the Provincial
Government of Jakarta, West Java and Banten along with all local governments bordering with Jakarta City under
an interregional cooperating body. A JMA governance mechanism should be developed on the basis of agreement
and common interests among themselves.
   Involvement of the central government in JMA governance will be necessary, because first, Jakarta, the core of
JMA, is the national capital; and second, the physical infrastructure development in the JMA will need huge
financial resources, beyond the capabilities of all provincial and local governments. As Laquian (2008, 19)
maintains, mega-urban region development strategy needs the involvement of all types of governance structure,
from small town, districts, municipalities, provincial agencies and agencies of national government.
   Given the complexity the JMA problem, the functions of a JMA governance mechanisms at present should focus
on general aspects, most notably the transport system, spatial development (tata ruang), watershed planning and
implementation, and solid waste management. This will obviously need the involvement of several central
government ministries including the Ministry of Public Works, the National Planning Agency and the Ministry of
Internal Affairs.
   The mixed model of urban governance is the most suitable for the JMA, in which the central, provincial and local
governments play very important roles in the management of the area. The central government should have the
authority to plan and develop major structures of physical infrastructure for the whole JMA, while the provincial
and local governments need to cede their authority over the above functions, but still retain their full authority over
the local government administration. This model has the potential to enhance the power of the existing BKSP, given
the flexibilities allowed by the new Law of Regional Government and law of the status of Jakarta as the National
Capital.


                                                    ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The author would like to thank two anonymous international referees for critical comments on an earlier version of
this article. He would also like to thank Dr Paul Collins, Mr Dan Cohen and Ms Kristin Anderson for valuable
suggestions. However, the author alone is responsible for any mistakes and shortcomings.


                                                         REFERENCES

Alisjahbana A. 2007. Economic and Environmental Aspects of Regional Development in Jabodetabek-punjur Area’ (in Indonesian). Paper
  presented to a Workshop on Jabodetabekjur (Jakarta Metropolitan Area) organized by Coordinating Board of Jakarta Metropolitan Area
  Development (BKSP Jabodetabekjur), Jakarta, 4 October.


Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                                      Public Admin. Dev. 28, 280–290 (2008)
                                                                                                                  DOI: 10.1002/pad
290                                                             T. FIRMAN


Azis IJ. 2003. Concepts and Practices of Decentralization: Some Notes on the Case of Indonesia’. Paper Prepared for Policy Dialogue on
   Empowering Women in Autonomy and Decentralization Process’ organized by the Office of the Permanent Mission of Indonesia to the United
   Nations, 29 May.
Bird R, Slack E. 2007. An Approach to Metropolitan Governance and Finance’, Environment and Planning C: Government and Policy, 25, 729–
   755.
Brodjonegoro B. 2006. Decentralization as a Fundamental Policy to Enhance the National Economic Growth and to Reduce the Interregional
   Disparity in Indonesia (in Indonesian). Acceptance Speech of Professorship in Economics. Faculty of Economics, University of Indonesia,
   18 March, Jakarta.
Central Board of Statistics (CBS). 2006. Economic Indicators, Monthly Statistical Bulletin, February, Jakarta.
Cheema SG. (n.d.), Promoting Integrity in Governance: Towards Anti-Corruption Strategies. http://www.arabgov-initiative.org/publications/
   publicservice/cheema.pdf/
Cheema GS, Rondinelli DA. 1983. Decentralization and Development: Policy Implementation in Developing Countries. Sage Publications:
   Beverly Hills, CA.
Dharmapatni I, Firman T. 1995. Problems and challenges of mega-urban regions in Indonesia: the case of Jabotabek and Bandung metropolitan
   area, regions. In The Mega-Urban Regions of Southeast Asia, McGee TG, Robinson IM (eds). University of British Columbia Press:
   Vancouver; 213–241.
DiGaetano A, Storm E. 2003. Comparative urban governance: an integrated approach. Urban Affairs Review 38: 356–395.
von Einsiedel IN. 1999. Managing Mega-Cities of Asia-Pacific: Governance and Institutional Challenges. In Asia-Pacific Development Monitor,
   Vol. 1 Asia-Pacific Development Centre: Kuala Lumpur.
Firman T. 1998. The restructuring of Jakarta metropolitan area. Cities 15(4): 229–244.
Firman T. 2003. Potential impacts of Indonesias fiscal decentralization reform on urban and regional development: towards a pattern of spatial
   disparity. Space and Polity 7(3): 247–271.
Firman T, Kombaitan B, Pradono P. 2007. The dynamics of Indonesia’s urbanisation. Urban Policy and Research 25(3): 413–434.
Freire M. 2007. Sustainable Cities: the Role of Local Governance in Managing Change, Paper Presented to the Symposium a Global Look at
   urban and Regional Governance: the State-Market-Civic Nexus, Emory University, 18–19 January.
Freire M, Stern R (eds). 2001. The Challenge of Urban Governance. The World Bank: Washington, DC.
Friedmann J. 1999. The Governance of City-Regions in East and Southeast Asia. Paper Presented to International Conference on Cities in Asia,
   December, Hiroshima, Japan.
Laquian AA. 1995. The governance of mega-urban regions. In The Mega-Urban Regions of Southeast Asia, McGee TG, Robinson IM (eds).
   University of British Columbia Press: Vancouver; 213–241.
Laquian AA. 2005a. Metropolitan governance reform in Asian. Public Administration and Development 25: 307–315.
Laquian AA. 2005b. Beyond Metropolis: The Planning and Governance of Asias Mega-Urban Regions. Woodrow Wilson Center Press:
   Washington, DC; and The Johns Hopkins University Press: Baltimore.
Laquian AA. 2008. The Planning and Governance of Asias Mega-Urban Regions’. Paper presented to the United nations Expert Group Meeting
   on Population Distribution, Urbanization, Internal Migration and Development. Population Division, Department of Economic and Social
   Affairs, United Nation Secretariat New York; 21–23 January 2008.
Montgomery MR, Stern R, Cohen B, Reed H (eds). 2004. Cities Transformed: Demographic Change and Its Implications in the Developing
   World, Panel on Urban Population Dynamics. National Research Council: Earthscan, London.
Mossberger K. 2007. The Many Meanings of Governance: How Should We Develop Research and Theory? Paper Presented to Conference on a
   Global Look at Urban and Regional Governence. The State-Market-Civic Nexus, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia.
OECD (Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development) Observer. 2000. The Reform of Metropolitan Governance, Washington,
   DC,October.
Prud’homme R. 1996. Megacities management: institutional development. In Megacity Management in the Asian and Pacific Region: Policy
   Issues and Innovative Appraoches, Stubbs J, Clarke G (eds). Proceedings of the Regional Seminar on Megacities Management in Asia and the
   Pacific,Asian Development Bank, United nations and World Bank. Urban Management Programme for Asia and the Pacific: Manila.
Rustiadi E. 2007. Spatial Analysis of Development Problems in Jakarta Metropolitan Area (in Indonesian). Unpublished Powerpoint Slides.
Sancton A. 2005. The governance of metropolitan areas in Canada. Public Administration and Development 5: 317–327.
Shah A. 2005. Local Governance in Industrialized Countries. The World Bank: Washington, DC.
Silver C. 2008. Planning the Megacity: Jakarta in the 20th Century. Routledge: London.
Soegijoko BT, Gardiner P, Samiadji BT. 2007. Demographic, economic and social dimensions of metropolitan in Indonesia. In Metropolitan in
   Indonesia: Trends and Challenges in Spatial Planning (in Indonesian), Winarso H, Hudalah D (eds). Department of Public Works: Jakarta.
Stubbs J, Clarke G (eds). 1996. Megacity Management in the Asian and Pacific Region: Policy Issues and Innovative Approaches. Proceedings
   of the Regional Seminar on Megacities Management in Asia and the Pacific. Asian Development Bank, United nations and World Bank. Urban
   Management Programme for Asia and the Pacific: Manila.
Talukder SH. 2006. Managing Megacities: A Case Study of Metropolitan Governance for Dhaka. Dissertation Presented for the Degree of Doctor
   of Philosophy at Murdoch University, Australia.
UNDP (United Nations Development Program). 2002. The Global Champaign for Urban Governance: Concept Paper (2nd edn). The United
   Nations Development Programme: New York.
Vogel RK. 2005. Decentralization and urban governance: reforming Tokyo metropolitan government. In Urban Governance Around the World,
   Ruble BA, Stren RE, Tulchin JS, Varet DH (eds). 2005. Woodroow Wilson International for Scholars: Washington, D.C.
Williams G. 1999. Institutional capacity and metropolitan governance: the Greater Toronto. Cities 16(5): 171–180.
Zulkaidi D. 2006. Jabodetabekjur megapolitan issue in the context of development management and Revision of law 34/1999 (in Indonesian).
   Jurnal Perencanaan Wilayah dan Kota 17(1): 1–27.




Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                                             Public Admin. Dev. 28, 280–290 (2008)
                                                                                                                           DOI: 10.1002/pad
