      Urban Geography




      ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rurb20




The role of urban transformation on inter-
suburban commuting: evidence from Jakarta
metropolitan area, Indonesia

Erie Sadewo, Delik Hudalah, Anzhelika Antipova, Long Cheng & Ibnu Syabri

To cite this article: Erie Sadewo, Delik Hudalah, Anzhelika Antipova, Long Cheng & Ibnu Syabri
(2022): The role of urban transformation on inter-suburban commuting: evidence from Jakarta
metropolitan area, Indonesia, Urban Geography, DOI: 10.1080/02723638.2022.2125649

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/02723638.2022.2125649




       Published online: 06 Oct 2022.



       Submit your article to this journal



       Article views: 59



       View related articles



       View Crossmark data




                      Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
             https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rurb20
URBAN GEOGRAPHY
https://doi.org/10.1080/02723638.2022.2125649




The role of urban transformation on inter-suburban
commuting: evidence from Jakarta metropolitan area,
Indonesia
                      a
Erie Sadewo               , Delik Hudalahb, Anzhelika Antipovac, Long Chengd and Ibnu Syabrib
a
 Badan Pusat Statistik, Jakarta, Indonesia; bSchool of Architecture, Planning, and Policy Development,
Institut Teknologi Bandung, Bandung, Indonesia; cDepartment of Earth Sciences, The University of Memphis,
Memphis, United States of America; dDepartment of Geography, University of Ghent, Ghent, Belgium


    ABSTRACT                                                                                   ARTICLE HISTORY
    Post-suburbanization, shifting the focus of urban spatial                                  Received 16 December 2020
    development to its periphery, is becoming a global policy                                  Accepted 8 September 2022
    concern. Changing urban form aﬀects travel behavior, where the
                                                                                               KEYWORDS
    traditional suburb-to-CBD commuting pattern has been contested                             Post-suburbanization;
    by inter-suburban commuting. This empirical study investigates                             commuting; spatial panel
    how employment decentralization and its associated                                         regression; Jakarta
    heterogeneous suburban amenities have inﬂuenced commuting                                  metropolitan area
    dynamics between suburbs in a developing country. Using the
    case of the Jakarta Metropolitan Area (JMA), Indonesia, spatial
    panel regression is applied to model inter-suburban commuting
    between 2008 and 2015. The results indicate that peripheral
    employment expansion due to industrial decentralization is
    followed by a signiﬁcant increase in inter-suburban commuting.
    The mono-functional industrial subcenter has attracted more
    commuters from other suburbs. Yet, it also pushed some
    residents to commute away for jobs in service ﬁrms. The study
    has added a better understanding of urban form-travel behavior
    relationships that have seldom been researched from the Global
    South perspective.




Introduction
This article investigates how the changing suburban environment and employment
deconcentration could inﬂuence inter-suburban commuting dynamics. The suburbs
have been traditionally seen as developed areas outside the core, which mainly func-
tioned as settlements (Harris, 2010). These urban fringe developments were linked to
the CBD through a traditional commuting pattern. However, the initial suburbanization
process had some breaks from the traditional development pattern (Wu & Phelps, 2008,
p. 465). Due to employment decentralization, the metropolitan periphery turned into a
multi-functional area with various activities containing industries and services while
oﬀering various employment (Soja, 2000). The process increased traditionally low sub-
urban density through inﬁll development, making suburban landscapes more similar
to the urban core (Soja, 2011). In the suburbs, particular urban functions such as airports,

CONTACT Erie Sadewo            erie@bps.go.id       Badan Pusat Statistik, Jl. dr. Sutomo 6-8, Jakarta, 10710, Indonesia
© 2022 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
2      E. SADEWO ET AL.


industrial and educational complexes, malls and commercial areas, theme parks, and
amusement centers emerge next to residential areas. The new urban system has been
termed “post-suburbia” (Borsdorf, 2004, p. 13; Kling et al., 1995), encompassing what
existing literature coined as “edge city”, “edgeless city”, or “technoburb” (Wu &
Phelps, 2008).
   Post-suburbanization reﬂects changes in the suburban functions, making them attrac-
tive places, accompanied by the simultaneous decreasing importance of the traditional
urban center (Phelps & Wu, 2011). While job concentration increases in the suburban
landscape, post-suburbanization can be identiﬁed by several common features, such as
a polycentric spatial pattern with mixed land-use and urban-rural blurring (Hudalah &
Firman, 2012). The post-suburbia inherited many CBD characteristics. Beauregard
(1995) argued that it becomes possible for suburbanites to do all their living, leisure,
and recreation in an area like the edge city. Local mobility dominates commuting patterns
in these areas, and most residents are isolated from the larger urban social politics. As a
result, the overall urban commuting length is argued to decrease.
   Contending perspectives argue that post-suburbanization makes commuting “no
longer a one-way commuter stream towards the city center” (Borsdorf, 2004, p. 11),
and most of the commuting are between suburbs (Richardson & Gordon, 2004). Conse-
quently, personal mobility among suburbs and new logistic requirements for the decen-
tralized service and leisure industries will increase commuting complexities (Borsdorf,
2004; Firman, 2011). These views imply that growing employment suburbanization
does not necessarily reduce the need to commute and may actually increase the
overall urban commuting length. Previous studies have supported the decreasing com-
muting length hypothesis, however, determined by various factors such as job-housing
balance, the degree of sprawling, and workers’ socio-economic characteristics (Horner,
2004; Horner & Meﬀord, 2007; Sultana, 2000, 2002; Sultana & Weber, 2007, 2014;
Weber & Sultana, 2008). Decreasing commuting is experienced by the inner-city, but
new subcenters run into the opposite (Jun, 2020).
   Current studies of commuting in the post-suburban era have mainly been discussed
within the employment decentralization process, rooted in the western world tradition.
These studies focus on service and retail-based decentralization, with less explanation
about inter-suburban commuting (Bontje, 2004; Helbich & Leitner, 2009; Lucy & Phillips,
1997; Tzaninis & Boterman, 2018). Most studies on inter-suburban commuting have also
been similarly conducted in developed countries. Studies have revealed that inter-subur-
ban commuting occurs because the spatial transformation is caused not by worker
residential adjustment and, instead, by increasing jobs-housing imbalances between
the suburbs (i.e. Aguiléra, 2005; Buchanan et al., 2006; Bontje, 2007; Gutiérrez &
García-Palomares, 2007; Small & Verhoef, 2007, p. 5; Baum-Snow, 2010).
   However, there are some essential diﬀerences between post-suburbanization processes
in the global north vs global south. Respectively, theories developed from global north
case studies have explanatory limitations when applied to the south. That is because
certain issues that are important in the north are less so in the global south, resulting
in a diﬀerent post-suburban commuting pattern. Cities and regions in the global south
have been experiencing premature deindustrialization, where growing jobs are domi-
nated by small-scale industries as specialized parts of the wider global value chains
(Pike, 2022, p. 8). The social transformation of employment and productivity culture
                                                                   URBAN GEOGRAPHY        3


from agriculture to industry is stalled and remains incomplete (Levy, 2017). As a result,
the jobs formed in these areas are typically occupied by less-skilled workers with a tem-
porary arrangement. Thus, the typical residential choice for the working class in the
global south is based on social exclusion and spatial segregation.
    Similar to other developing countries, the common source of urban spatial segregation
in Indonesia, like race, is negligible. Urban population distribution in Indonesia is more
associated with poverty and informality (Rukmana et al., 2018). Most peripheral
developments in JMA are inhabited by the lower-income population, unlike the
middle-class suburbs in the US (Firman, 2011, p. 207). The capital inﬂux and industri-
alization occur within the extended metropolitan region’s interstitial areas, producing
mixed uses of high-density residence, industry, and agriculture. The mixture of
residential-agricultural-manufacturing suburbanization-based land-uses in these areas
does not resemble that of the inner city and is not observed in western countries
(Kurnia et al., 2022).
    Such morphology, termed desakota (McGee, 1991), provides a background for Indo-
nesia’s post-suburbanization process. Most households in the desakota region tend to be
locally employed, while some commute to the nearby city. The growing post-suburban
area has become another informal job attraction for these households, while many
formal suburban jobs are occupied by workers from the traditional core. The resulting
reverse commuting and mixed settlement pattern reﬂects an early stage of the process
and partially diﬀerentiates post-suburbanization in Indonesia from western countries
(Firman & Fahmi, 2017).
    In addition to the contextual background, previous studies on suburban commuting
have paid little attention to the spatio-temporal aspect. As spatial units, suburbs have
space-speciﬁc time-invariant variables. Although jobs and housing are generally balanced
at the metropolitan level, some parts of the urban areas will have plentiful jobs and less
housing, and vice versa (Horner, 2004). In the US, the distribution of oﬃce space across
regions was uneven, whereas some metropolises have an edge city and others have mul-
tiple peripheral nodes (Lang et al., 2009). Edge city development has also produced varied
settlement shapes and morphology typology across major European metropolises (Bontje
& Burdack, 2005). Thus, diﬀerent development trajectories created employment and
population growth disparity among the suburbs resulting in the spatial distribution of
various suburban attractions. The contrast generates inter-suburban commuting ﬂows,
which might diﬀer from traditional suburb-to-core commuting. Failure to account for
these variables may increase the risk of estimation bias (Elhorst, 2010).
    Given these shortcomings, this paper provides an empirical analysis of the impact of
metropolitan transformation on commuting dynamics in metropolitan suburbs. Using
the Jakarta Metropolitan Area (JMA), Indonesia, as a case study, the potential spatio-
temporal drivers of traditional and inter-suburban commuting ﬂows are examined.
The case of the JMA illustrates the complex relationship between urban form and mobi-
lity in one of the world’s largest metropolises and contributes to the current studies in
two ways. First, it improves the understanding of the linkage between post-suburbaniza-
tion and changing commuting patterns in the suburbs of the Global South. While studies
on employment decentralization in this region are still limited, they represent fundamen-
tal diﬀerences to the Global North regarding the lack of its residents’ options in choosing
where to live (Harris, 2010). Secondly, it provides empirical evidence of what Bontje
4      E. SADEWO ET AL.


(2004) addressed as the impacts of the new employment subcenters in the metropolitan
periphery on sustainable regional development.
   This paper is organized into seven parts. Following the introduction, the second
section provides the literature review of the nexus between urban form and commuting,
the emergence of inter-suburban commuting, and the framework built upon these dis-
cussions. The third section highlights the urban development and mobility in the
JMA. The fourth section presents the data and methods used in the analysis. The ﬁfth
section provides the results of descriptive and statistical modeling, followed by a discus-
sion section. The last section summarizes the ﬁndings and oﬀers a conclusion and
avenues for future studies.


Urban form and the emergence of inter-suburban commuting
The urban form and commuting nexus
The modern urban reality was marked by rapid decentralization of economic activities,
increased individual mobility, and a more fragmented spatial distribution of activities
that led to the dispersed urban realms of multiple urban centers. In the suburbs, the
transformation produced a land-use that signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the traditional dor-
mitory functions. The transformation process, however, varies across regions. In the US,
suburban land-use change is mainly driven by massive oﬃce space development, exceed-
ing the residential function and creating the so-called “edge city” (Beauregard, 1995;
Garreau, 1991). The new suburban employment poles in Europe have more speciﬁc func-
tions and lack independence from the traditional center. Having a less urban function, it
was more of a “city edge” than an “edge city” (Bontje & Burdack, 2005). In China, the
emerging edge cities arose from the government’s planned industrial parks in speciﬁc
suburban locations (Zheng et al., 2017). The similarity of these examples came from
their typical outer peripheral area and mixed land-uses.
   The new urban form attracts much interest regarding mobility and accessibility issues
(Clark & Kuijpers-Linde, 1994), since understanding the linkages between urban land
development and commuting helps achieve a more sustainable city (Momeni & Anti-
pova, 2022). Horner (2004) classiﬁed the land-use’s impact on commuting under three
main topics: job-housing balance, excess commuting, and accessibility. In terms of
balance, the polycentric urban form is seen as more eﬃcient because it will reduce com-
muting times and costs (Clark & Kuijpers-Linde, 1994). The emergence of an additional
employment subcenter is believed to juxtapose the workers to their job. Consequently,
co-location between workers and their employment location will increase the job-
housing balance.
   Aguiléra (2005) disproves those arguments by showing that commuting length in
polycentric metropolises could also increase. Often, the majority of employment in the
subcenters is occupied by the non-residents who live further from their place of work,
and co-location between residential areas and the (sub)center is only experienced by a
minority of inhabitants. The jobs-housing imbalance due to racial segregation, income
diﬀerences, and workers’ ability to relocate their housing worsened the commuting
length (i.e. Horner & Meﬀord, 2007; Sultana, 2002; Weber & Sultana, 2008). Greater
gaps between subcenters will generate more excess commuting for the suburbanites.
                                                                  URBAN GEOGRAPHY       5


   Another aspect of land-use that inﬂuences commuting is accessibility. From a geo-
graphical aggregation point of view, the accessibility study covers the role of location,
proximity, and potential interaction with other places (Horner, 2004). For instance, dis-
tance to the CBD has been used in many studies to explain commuting length variability.
A consistent negative relationship between the distance to CBD and commuting length
implies that widespread urban expansion will make commuters travel farther (Hu &
Wang, 2016). The eﬀect of secondary urban centers’ existence relies on their size and
proximity to workers. Longer commuting was generated by more prominent employ-
ment clusters that attract more workers and less accessible clusters (Sultana, 2000).
The role of location is strongly related to the unequal distribution of resources across
geographical spaces that create travel’s supply and demand.
   Other studies on accessibility focus on the individual and their activities, given its
beneﬁt and constraints. Assuming that workers seek utility maximization, there must
be an adjustment of wages and rents level to prevent life quality from degradation and
avoid an incentive for some workers to move (Roback, 1982). In their hypothetical
model, Koster and Rouwendal (2013) prescribed a bid rent as a function of commuting
costs between residential and business areas. The impact of the land rent diﬀerential is
manifested in the spatial clustering pattern, whereas large cities without clear economic
clusters tend to have lengthier commuting and vice versa (Engelfriet & Koomen, 2017;
Song et al., 2017).
   Urban size in terms of the population could create apparent commuting pattern diﬀer-
ences between high-density urban and less densely sprawling areas (Sultana & Weber,
2007). When a city’s population increases, the market responds by containing or redu-
cing people within a location to adjust their interaction costs (Partridge et al., 2010).
Higher uncertainty about commuting costs will decrease residential mobility (i.e. perma-
nent relocation of residence) both in the city center and the surrounding area. These
commuting costs optimally connect the individual’s workplace and dwelling, with a resi-
dential relocation postponed to a later point in time. Residents of remote suburban and
exurban areas continue to tolerate higher commuting costs (Schmidt, 2014), mainly
because the commuting and wage rates relations tend to be convex (Hu et al., 2017).


Commuting between suburbs
While polycentricity emerged in the third wave of urban historical development, com-
muting between suburbs is not new. It has become prominent in the early twentieth
century. During 1912-1936, the annual commuting aggregate between the ﬁrst-tier
suburbs of Chicago exceeded the traditional commuting (i.e. suburb-to-CBD) by at
least 3.5 percent (Miller, 2018). From a suburban perspective, out-commuting to other
suburbs could be analogous to intercity commuting. This view rules out the hierarchy
of urban functions and focuses on the horizontal relationship with diﬀerent character-
istics instead. Suh (1988) has shown that intercity commuting is not possible under
the standard urban economic model because an individual who commutes between
cities should pay more commuting and rent costs than those who live near the boundary.
    Empirical evidence has also emphasized the importance of various settlement and
growing employment destination characteristics. Intercity commuting ﬂow supplies
are generated by the diﬀerences in wages, housing costs, the distance between counties,
6      E. SADEWO ET AL.


and net migration (Renkow & Hoover, 2000). Meanwhile, intercity commuting will
increase due to growing job ratios and diversity, and the insigniﬁcant accessibility
eﬀect suggests competition between destinations (Congdon & Lloyd, 2012). Hence,
labor market structure is essential in explaining commuting between municipalities
(Watkins, 2016), and the commuting numbers increase in proportion to the city size,
population density, and employment (Kofoed, 2020). These studies have shown that
under various circumstances, the demand for and supply of employment is an essential
determinant of inter-city commuting.
   In the case of multi-centered urban areas, the developed subcenter may inherit the
CBD characteristics, however, on a smaller scale. Conditional to its attractiveness, the
two subcenters would vary in their rental cost and wage levels. The asymmetric land
rent between subcenters in a polycentric region leads to incomplete population segre-
gation (Wrede, 2015). Moving costs and market imperfections in housing support the
coexistence of people working in diﬀerent employment centers, explaining the need
for cross-commuting (Viguié, 2015). While a concave commuting cost connects
between subcenters (Berliant & Tabuchi, 2015), the subsidy for intercity commuting in
equilibrium could create welfare-enhancing transfers that stimulate commuting
decisions (Borck & Wrede, 2009). Otherwise, cross-commuting workers need to be com-
pensated with higher wages.
   Heterogeneity between urban areas, including a life quality diﬀerential caused by the
discrepancy of endowed amenities, also provides an incentive for intercity commuting.
Hypothetically, traveling ﬂows between cities were inﬂuenced not only by land rent
and wages but also by household structure and their members’ skills level (Tschar-
aktschiew & Hirte, 2010). While a household with high-skilled members is assumed to
increase commuting distance, having fewer family members increases intra-zonal com-
muting trips.


Synthesizing inter-suburban commuting: a conceptual framework
As depicted in Figure 1, our conceptual framework suggests that inter-suburban com-
muting tends to be inﬂuenced by unequal land-use distribution between suburbs. Due




Figure 1. A conceptual framework of inter-suburban commuting.
                                                                   URBAN GEOGRAPHY        7


to the decentralization of employment, several suburbs might shift from primarily dor-
mitory towns into more attractive places and oﬀer greater employment opportunities,
better wages, and higher life quality with more access to urban amenities. In contrast,
other suburbs in the same metropolitan area merely maintain or decline their residential
function. We expect that inter-suburban commuting is a worker’s response to match
their aspiration with these heterogeneities. For some workers, higher amenity disparities
could potentially threaten the utility maximization process and degrade their quality of
quality. Therefore, they mitigate this by traveling between diﬀerent locations.
   Suburbs with higher life quality experience population growth, increasing population
density, and fewer household members. Suppose locations with increasing population
and density do not coincide with the employment opportunities, the unemployment
rate will rise to worsen the job-housing balance. The particular employment growth
poles can potentially pull workers from other dormitory suburbs or those in decline.
However, housing prices close to more attractive suburbs tend to be higher due to
land rent competition with business entities. Hence, it attenuates the subcenter
housing accessibility, forcing workers to compensate for higher commuting costs with
lower housing costs.


Peripheral urban development of Jakarta metropolitan area
Over the last ﬁve decades, the development of Jakarta has expanded rapidly to the sur-
rounding areas. Sadewo et al. (2018) have shown that during 1976–2016 the number
of medium and large enterprises in the JMA suburbs have grown at an average rate of
93 percent annually. Nevertheless, many service industries in the periphery have lost
their signiﬁcance in the last decade, as most of newly establishments choose to locate
in Jakarta. Rukmana et al. (2018) reported that nearly 40 percent of the manufacturing
industries in the JMA, including seven large industrial estates, are located in Bekasi
Regency. The manufacturing shift from Jakarta to its periphery signiﬁes a regional
restructuring process.
   There occurred several consequences to the population in the peripheral areas. Jakar-
ta’s population growth has decreased from 2.5 percent before the 1990s to 0.11 percent a
decade after, followed by an increase in its surrounding areas (Cahyadi & Surtiari, 2016).
In the last three decades, a decreasing proportion of Jakarta citizens (from 54.6% to
35.5%) indicates that many people are moving into the periphery (Farda & Lubis,
2018, p. 43). A recent spatial structure of the JMA is polycentric, with at least four sig-
niﬁcant subcenters located outside Jakarta, including Bekasi, Tangerang, Bogor Regen-
cies, and Bogor (Sadewo et al., 2020).
   The spatial restructuring in the JMA has also inﬂuenced commuting patterns, includ-
ing an increase in the average number of daily trips and trip lengths in the JMA between
1985 and 2000 (Susilo et al., 2007). Parallel to the peripheral population growth, the
number of daily commuters in the mid-2000s reached 700,000 people, increasing
tenfold compared to two decades earlier (Dharmowijoyo et al., 2014). Sadewo (2021)
reports that the average commuting length of JMA in 2005 was 21.94 km, with an
average travel time of 54.78 min. Most long-distance commuting trips are from outer
suburbs like Tangerang Regency (37.03 km). Meanwhile, Bekasi Regency residents
have the shortest commuting length of 15.33 km, indicating a diﬀerence in employment
8      E. SADEWO ET AL.


attraction for local workers. Although Hudalah et al. (2013) have suggested that the
massive employment suburbanization in the JMA took place in the 1990s, the general
commuting pattern in the early 2000s is still dominated by the traditional travel to the
CBD.
   The peripheral urban transformation in the JMA is reﬂected in the massive
growth of urban settlements on the outskirts and the rise of reverse and complex
commuting (Firman, 2011). In the early 2000s, almost a million people commuted
daily between Jakarta and fringe areas. Numerous workers are employed in periph-
eral small and new towns while maintaining residence in Jakarta. However, recent
evidence shows that the substantial urban spatial transformation in the JMA over
the last decade is also followed by increasing inter-suburban commuting. In 2014,
there were almost 750,000 commuters between the JMA’s peripheral areas, nearly
three times bigger than the reverse commuting from Jakarta to surrounding areas
(Sadewo & Syabri, 2018). The growing number of commuters increased JMA’s
average commuting time to 61.87 min in 2015, mainly from inner-suburban commu-
ters (Sadewo, 2021). Rising commuting time indicates a more sprawled JMA devel-
opment and also manifests widening destination options for the inner-suburban
residents compared to a decade ago. The expanding scale of an industrial cluster
during 2006–2016 (Sadewo et al., 2018) seems to have contributed to an increase
in inter-suburban commuting.
   Regarding mobility, social segregation is visible in commuting mode preference. An
earlier study by Sugiarto Miwa et al. (2014) in the JMA has shown that increasing
income accompanies rising transportation costs. Like many other developing countries,
up to 56 percent of commuting travel in the region is conducted by motorcycle (Sadewo
& Syabri, 2018). While the automobile-based commuter growth was stagnant between
2000-2010, the use of motorcycles increased by 27.5 percent (Susantono et al., 2011).
The use of motorcycle by JMAs’ suburbanites can save 30 percent in transportation
costs compared to when public transport is used (Rukmana et al., 2018). The rapid
use of low-cost private vehicles to facilitate transportation cost-maximization seems to
have encouraged many people to keep commuting rather than moving to a diﬀerent
location.


Data and methods
This study takes the suburban perspectives to analyze in- and out-commuting ﬂows. The
urban classiﬁcation in this article is based on the administrative deﬁnition. The JMA
covered an area of 6,256 km2, consisting of eight municipalities and one province. In pre-
sidential Decree No. 54/2008, the ﬁve municipals within Jakarta are governed as a special
region and classiﬁed as the urban core of the JMA. In contrast, the surrounding munici-
pals outside Jakarta as JMA’s satellite, are traditionally recognized as its suburbs. The
JMA suburbs can be grouped into the inner- and outer-peripheries (Kurnia et al.,
2022; Rukmana et al., 2018, p. 110). The municipalities adjacent to Jakarta, such as
Bekasi, Depok, South Tangerang, and Tangerang, are considered inner-peripheries,
whereas Bekasi Regency, Bogor Regency, Bogor City, and Tangerang Regency are
classiﬁed as outer-periphery (Figure 2). This categorization and their corresponding
municipal areas are used as our geographical units of analysis.
                                                                  URBAN GEOGRAPHY       9




Figure 2. Urban classiﬁcation of JMA.


   This study analyses in-commuting ﬂow (measured as the total number of in-commu-
ters) and out-commuting ﬂow (the total number of out-commuter). It is appropriate to
reﬂect the gap in employment opportunities between counties (Goetz et al., 2010, p. 281).
Following the aforementioned conceptual model, several suburbs of JMA generate and
attract commuting both from Jakarta and other suburbs due to massive employment
growth and change. Following the conceptual framework in the previous section, this
study examines the inﬂuence of the drivers discussed in the frameworks on in- and
out- commuting from the suburbs.
   Only a few datasets provide commuting information on a large scale in Indonesia. The
national statistical oﬃce (BPS) has published commuting data through the annual labor
force surveys (SAKERNAS) at the administrative municipality level since 2008. However,
the regency-level data is absent from the 2016 SAKERNAS. Therefore, we limited our
analysis to 2008–2015 data. Following the SAKERNAS concept, a person is deﬁned as
a commuter if they perform daily travel by crossing their administrative residence
borders and coming back within 24 h. This study uses various regency-level socioeco-
nomic indicators released by the BPS in the corresponding years as the explanatory vari-
ables (see Table 1).
10        E. SADEWO ET AL.


Table 1. Description of variables used in the spatial panel model.
Factors                Factors          Variables / Proxy               Measure                 Source
Suburban          In-commuting     Numbers of in-commuters        Ln (in-commuting)     National Labor Survey
  commuting                          from other suburbs                                  (SAKERNAS)
                                     (People)
                  out-commuting    Numbers of out-commuters       Ln (out-commuting)
                                     to other suburbs (People)
                  Traditional      Numbers of out-commuters       Ln (out-commuting)
                    commuting        to Jakarta (People)
Suburban          Population       Diﬀerences in population       Annual population     Municipal in ﬁgures
  heterogeneity     growth           between particular period      growth (%)           publication on
                  Density          Density of suburban            Ln (Numbers of         respected years
                                     municipality                   people per Km2)
                  Household (HH)   Size of household              Avg. HH members
                   structure
                  Wage             Minimum municipal wage         Ln (wage)
                                    (Rupiah)
                  Unemployment     Numbers of active workforce    Unemployment rate
                                    which unemployed                (%)
                  Employment       Numbers of new                 Ln (new               Economic census 2016
                   opportunity      employment in                   employment)
                                    manufacture
                  Transport cost   Average per kilometer          Ln (transport cost)   SAKERNAS & National
                                    transportation cost for                               Socio-Economic
                                    commuters (Rupiah)                                    Survey (SUSENAS)
                  Housing cost     Average housing cost per sq.   Ln (housing cost)     SUSENAS
                                    Meters (Rupiah)




    The studies of commuting ﬂows at the macro-level have mainly focused on the spatial
interaction between geographical regions. Several methods, like gravity and radiation
models, might have been widespread. Still, both have been criticized for failing to
reﬂect the inﬂuence of socio-geographical segregation and location specialization on
commuting ﬂows (Masucci et al., 2013) and overestimating ﬂows (Spadon et al.,
2019). Additionally, the gravity model assumes that the residual error of bilateral ﬂows
is independent of origin and destination alternatives, which was unlikely to be achieved
because the choice of a destination aﬀects the other options (Pace & LeSage, 2008). Ignor-
ing this assumption would not only produce an ineﬃcient estimation but might also yield
signiﬁcant inconsistency and bias. Moreover, there is a need to account for the temporal
eﬀects of commuting ﬂow, especially when dealing with urban transformation. While the
volume of migration and commuting tends to change over time (Drobne et al., 2013),
most studies using spatial interaction models lack temporality as they are conducted
by creating a time dummy or repeating the models along the observation period.
    To overcome the gravity model drawbacks, a spatial regression model to estimate the
bilateral ﬂows type of cases was proposed. An interaction between geographical units is
modeled as a spatial lag process, where geographical proximity results in the dependency
between origin and destination alternatives. Our paper uses the spatial panel model to
estimate the inﬂuencing factors of inter-suburban commuting ﬂows in the JMA. There
are two advantages of employing this method. First, the enhancement or depression of
commuting ﬂows is strongly correlated with the attractiveness propensity of the neigh-
boring destinations (Griﬃth & Jones, 1980). Therefore, incorporating spatial weights
in the model not only accounts for spatial variation but also indirectly considers proxi-
mity eﬀects between regencies. Meanwhile, taking a panel structure in the model
                                                                     URBAN GEOGRAPHY         11


provides more variability and degrees of freedom, with less collinearity among variables,
making it more eﬃcient and informative (Baltagi, 2008, p. 7). To increase eﬃciency and
mitigate the risk of producing a biased standard error, the spatial panel model accounts
not only for serial but also for spatial correlation (Copiello, 2020).
   Following Elhorst (2014), the taxonomy of a linear spatial dependence model could be
distinguished using two perspectives. First, we can start with a non-spatial regression
model and test whether spatial interaction (forward step) is needed. Concerning the
panel data structure, the regression model could be written as.
                                  Y = a + X b + mi + 1it                                   (1)
where Y denotes a vector of N x 1 commuting ﬂow from (to) municipal unit-i in the JMA
periphery at time-t (i = 1, 2, … , n; t = 1, 2, … , T). Vector Y is paired with N x k matrix of
explanatory variables X. While a is a constant, b is k x 1 vector of unknown coeﬃcients,
mi is an unobserved individual-speciﬁc eﬀect, and 1it  iid(0, s21 ) is a random disturb-
ance. The parameter mi can be treated as ﬁxed or random, and the b which is estimated
by the random eﬀect (b̂RE ) and the ﬁxed eﬀect (b̂FE ) are assumed to both consistent. Pace
and LeSage (2008) described that if q = b̂FE − b̂RE and var(q) = var(b̂FE ) − var(b̂RE)
then the Hausman test m = q′ [var(q)]−1 q has a limited x2 distribution with a degree
of freedom equal to the number of parameters. If the value of m is statistically signiﬁcant,
the model is favored for a ﬁxed eﬀect (FE) rather than a random eﬀect (RE).
   Secondly, one could start with a more general nested model consisting of a spatial
interaction eﬀect and then get a more parsimonious model through parameter signiﬁ-
cance testing (backward step). From this perspective, a complete model with all inter-
action eﬀects could be written as.
                           Y = lWY + aıN + X b + WX u + u                                  (2)

                                        u = rWu + 1                                        (3)
The n x n nonsingular spatial weight matrix W consist of non-negative pre-speciﬁed
value on the (i,j)-th element (i = 1,2, … ,m; j = 1,2, … m) which described the closeness
between locations i and j. The spatial interaction parameter l denotes the endogenous
eﬀect, u denotes the exogenous eﬀect, and r denotes the error eﬀect. Combining
equations (1) and (2) results in the general nesting model with the spatial panel eﬀect.
                           Y = lWY + aıN + X b + WX u + u                                  (4)

                                     u = m + rWu + 1                                       (5)

   This study uses the latter approach, whereas the parameter estimation and model
identiﬁcation are conducted using the spml package (Millo & Piras, 2012) in R software.
While applying a maximum likelihood approach for parameter estimation, this package
utilizes several additional methods for hypothesis testing, such as the LM test (Baltagi
et al., 2003; Baltagi et al., 2007) and the spatial Hausman test (Pace & LeSage, 2008).
Before the parameter estimation, error components were examined to concentrate and
maximize the model likelihood iteratively. To determine the appropriateness of a
spatial panel model, Lagrange Multiplier (LM) test is conducted using the joint BSK
method and its extension (Baltagi et al., 2003). Meanwhile, the BSJK method is employed
12      E. SADEWO ET AL.


to test for a random regional eﬀect (Baltagi et al., 2007). The conceptual framework for a
model selection is given in Figure 3.
   This study applies various spatial weights for the model estimation. The models were
examined using three diﬀerent spatial weights and compared against each other
(Ganning et al., 2013), including the following: (1) the nearest city weight (W1), (2)
inverse-distance weight (W2), and (3) customized weight using relative inter-suburban
commuting ﬂows (W3).

                              W1ij {1,0, ifotherwise
                                             two areas shared similar border
                                                                                       (6)

                                                         1
                                             W2ij =                                    (7)
                                                         dij


                                                       
                                                       T
                                                             cij
                                           W3ij = t=1                                  (8)
                                                   
                                                   T
                                                             ci
                                                       t=1


where dij is the Euclidean distance (in kilometers) between the highest local employment
peak in municipals i and j. Meanwhile, cij denotes a commuting volume (the number of
commuters) from a municipal i to a municipal j. All spatial weight values were normal-
ized on rows. The appropriate weight for the model is obtained by comparing an infor-
mation criterion (Seya et al., 2013). Thus, the best model in this study is selected by
comparing the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) and Bayesian Information Criterion
(BIC) values. Traditional commuting ﬂows model estimation is conducted as a compari-
son to verify the validity of the explanatory variable used in the model.




Figure 3. Spatial panel model identiﬁcation framework.
                                                                URBAN GEOGRAPHY       13


Results
Growing inter-suburban commuting in JMA
The inter-suburban commuting in the JMA has been increasing during the last decade.
Between 2008 and 2015, the inter-suburban annual commuting numbers have grown
from 598,000–818,000, rising by 4.65 percent on average. It is higher than the
growth of traditional commuting, estimated at 3.7 percent in the same period
(Figure 4). Nevertheless, the trips to the CBD still dominate the commuting pattern
in the JMA, especially in the eastern region. Bekasi has become the most signiﬁcant tra-
ditional commuter origin in the inner-urban area, while the adjacent Bekasi Regency
comes second. Most commuters use private vehicles, growing from 58 percent to 75
percent from 2008–2015. For inter-suburban commuting, Bogor Regency, with its
largest population, shared the most considerable portion, followed by Tangerang
Regency.
   The source of inter-suburban commuting growth not always comes from Bogor
Regency but also Tangerang in the inner-urban areas and Bekasi Regency in the
outer-suburbs. As in traditional commuting, private modes have become the primary
choice for inter-suburban commuters. During 2008–2015, private mode users increased
from 48 to 75 percent. The increase of private mode for traditional and inter-suburban
commuting mostly came from the mode shift as the public transport use has decreased by
half for both the traditional suburb-to-the CBD and inter-suburb commuting ﬂows
during 2008–2015.
   While there was no speciﬁc growth pattern regarding the origin of inter-suburban
commuting, the destinations tend to agglomerate in particular locations (Figure 5).
On average, Tangerang, Bogor City, and Bekasi Regency account for nearly 52 percent
of total in-commuting from other suburban areas. The doubling position of the Bekasi




Figure 4. Annual commuting pattern in JMA 2008–2015.
14      E. SADEWO ET AL.




Figure 5. Commuting ﬂow comparison of JMA in 2008 and 2015.



Regency as both a traditional and an inter-suburban commuting origin is somewhat odd,
as the area was known as one of the most prominent employment growth poles in the
JMA periphery. During 2008-2015, the total employment of the new medium- and
large-sized establishment (MLE) in this area reached 126,000 jobs, the largest among
other peripheral areas. Most of this employment came from manufacturing industries,
shown by an increasing proportion of manufacturing employment (from 30.01 percent
in 2008–38.47 percent in 2015) and a rise in the minimum wage by almost three
times. In comparison, the Tangerang Regency has generated 19 percent less employment
with similar characteristics in the same period, but its traditional commuting was
reduced to 12,000 trips.
   The massive economic restructuring of manufacturing in the Bekasi Regency has
mainly beneﬁtted the workers from the external areas. The job opportunity in
Bekasi Regency primarily existed in the manufacturing sectors, while those working
in commercial or service sectors had to commute to Bekasi. Burdened by the rapid
annual population growth of 4.4 percent between 2008 and 2015, many new jobs in
this area do not match local labor qualiﬁcations and instead become magnets for
workers from other places. For skilled and high-educated service workers, commuting
from the Bekasi Regency to Jakarta is still considered beneﬁcial. However, for the
marginalized labor, the option was to seek jobs in the nearest suburban
neighborhoods.
   The adjacent neighborhood, Bekasi City, has the highest average in-commuting
growth (Figure 6), implying that this area attracts the most service sector workers
from the Bekasi Regency. For the Tangerang Regency, the situation is quite
diﬀerent. Similar economic restructuring waves have brought more beneﬁts to the
locals. Having 3.5 percent of annual population growth, the Tangerang Regency
had negative in-commuting growth and a low rise in out-commuting. Thus, post-
suburbanization in the JMA periphery seems to create a dual impact, beneﬁting
regional and local labor markets in Bekasi and Tangerang Regencies, respectively.
                                                                    URBAN GEOGRAPHY        15




Figure 6. Average growth of JMA’s inter-suburban in- and out-commuting between 2008 and 2015.


The suburban commuting models
A spatial panel regression model was applied for both out-commuting and in-commut-
ing ﬂows to verify the inﬂuencing drivers of inter-suburban commuting. Prior to the par-
ameter estimation, error components, the appropriateness of a spatial panel model, and
random regional eﬀect were examined. The results of the error component model using
the BSK method are signiﬁcant, rejecting the null hypothesis of no spatial error and a
random error eﬀect (H0: r = s2m = 0). The extension test of a random regional eﬀect
assuming no spatial error eﬀects (H0: s2m = 0, assuming r = 0) and the BSJK test of a
random regional eﬀect hypothesis, which allows for spatial error eﬀects (H0: s2m = 0,
allowing r = 0), are also rejected. It implies that a random regional eﬀect strongly inﬂu-
ences each model, allowing the spatial Hausman test to proceed.
   The results of the spatial Hausman test for the diﬀerent spatial weights are mixed,
whereas three models favored a ﬁxed eﬀect (FE) while the rest supported a random
eﬀect (RE). However, when comparing its parsimony, the nearest city spatial weight
matrix (W1) provides the RE with the lowest AIC and BIC values for each commuting
pattern. Thus, the spatial regression parameter estimation proceeds with the RE. The
results of the panel eﬀect identiﬁcation test and a model selection are provided in
Table 2.
   The parameter estimation results for an inter-suburban commuting model suggested
the presence of an interaction eﬀect in each model. While a signiﬁcant endogenous inter-
action eﬀect was only found in the in-commuting model, an exogenous interaction eﬀect
and interaction among errors could be identiﬁed in both in-commuting and out-com-
muting models (Table 3). Hence, in-commuting ﬂow is estimated under the General
Nesting Spatial Model with a random error (GNSM-RE). In contrast, the out-commuting
model is estimated under the Spatial Durbin Error Model with a random error (SDEM-
RE). The presence of error interaction implies that the model still contains a certain
                                                                                                                                                                           16




                                                                                                                                                                           E. SADEWO ET AL.




Table 2. Hypothesis testing result for model identiﬁcation.
                                         out-commuting to suburban                    In-commuting from suburban                       Traditional commuting
Model identiﬁcation               W1               W2                W3        W1                W2                W3        W1                 W2               W3
H0: r = sm = 0
           2
                                 10.36**         32.42***            4.76*    20.25***         15.26***            2.47     30.64***          23.68***          21.52***
H0: sm2 = 0, assuming r = 0       3.22**          5.69***            2.18*     4.50***          3.91***            1.36      5.54***           4.87***           4.64***
H0: sm2 = 0, allowing r = 0       4.15*           3.98*              4.52*     4.31*            2.31               4.32*     3.03              2.54              4.50*
Spatial Hausman test
H0: b̂RE -b̂FE = 0                3.09           18.74           86.61***     11.73            31.55*          44.79***     23.01              8.51              4.49
Panel eﬀect                      RE              RE              FE           RE               FE              FE           RE                RE                RE
AIC                             371.06          428.36         2423.64       348.55           500.27          359.70       351.92            415.70            230.22
BIC                             409.92          467.22         2481.39       387.41           558.56          417.99       390.78            454.56            269.08
                                                                         URBAN GEOGRAPHY         17


Table 3. Parameter estimation of the best model selected.
                                 Inter-Suburban         Inter-suburban
Explanatory variable             out-commuting           in-commuting          Traditional commuting
Intercept                            9.39                   24.66***                  2.09
Pop. Growth                          0.00                    0.00                     0.00
Density                             −1.02***                −0.24                    −0.38
Household structure                  0.1                     0.07                     0.08
Wage                                 0.5                    −0.75*                   −0.01
Unemployment                         0.00                   −0.01                     0.01
Emp. opportunity                     0.07**                 −0.02                     0.02
Transport cost                      −0.01                    0.04                     0.07
Housing cost                         0.73*                   0.05                     1.35***
Sp. lag (Pop. Growth)                0.01                   −0.01                     0.00
Sp. lag (Density)                   −2.03***                −0.77                    −1.92***
Sp. lag (Household structure)        0.16                   −0.27                     0.1
Sp. lag (Wage)                      −0.29                    1.31***                 −0.09
Sp. lag (Unemployment)               0.00                   −0.05***                 −0.01
Sp. lag (Emp. opportunity)          −0.01                   −0.02                     0.04
Sp. lag (Transport cost)            −0.02                    0.06                     0.13
Sp. lag (Housing cost)               2.63**                 −0.83                     1.94***
r (spatial error)                    0.55**                  0.62***                 −0.07
l. (spatial lag)                    −0.49                   −0.40*                   −0.13



amount of an eﬀect due to the omitted variables that are spatially autocorrelated between
geographical units.
    For the out-commuting model, an increase in population density by one percent
would decrease out-commuting to another suburb by an equal magnitude. Conversely,
an increase in housing costs by one percent could improve out-commuting by 0.7
percent. For both variables, there is a signiﬁcant exogenous interaction with a similar
eﬀect. The exogenous interaction of the SDEM-RE model could be directly interpreted
as the indirect or spillover eﬀect resulting from the change in explanatory variables
(LeSage & Pace, 2009, p. 42). Thus, an increase in population density in a particular sub-
urban area by one percent would also decrease not only out-commuting activities in that
suburb but also in the surrounding areas by two percent. Similarly, an increase in housing
costs by one percent would improve out-commuting ﬂow by 2.6 percent. A signiﬁcant
positive inﬂuence can also be found in the new employment opportunities in manufac-
turing with a smaller magnitude. This suggests that people who commute to other sub-
urban areas seek employment opportunities other than manufacturing.
    In the JMA periphery, high residential density with more expensive housing costs
characterizes the inner-suburban area. The model’s contrasting eﬀects on housing
costs are visible through the high out-commuting ﬂows from this area. An agreement
with the theory is reached if the impact of both density and housing costs are negative
(i.e. commuters come from more minor dense locations with lower housing costs).
This means that only the housing cost variable contrasts with our proposed conceptual
framework. During 2008-2015, the average number of inner-to-outer suburban commut-
ing reached 42 percent, while the reverse direction accounted for 28 percent (Figure 7).
For instance, a lower population density with a high out-commuting number could be
found in Bogor Regency and Tangerang Regency. Many workers from those areas
travel to their adjacent neighborhoods, Bogor and Tangerang. However, it should also
be noted that during 2008–2015 both h experienced vast growth in out-commuting
to other suburbs. Thus, there is an out-commuting exchange between paired
18      E. SADEWO ET AL.




Figure 7. The dynamics of annual inter-suburban commuting direction in JMA 2008–2015.


inter-suburban areas. The workers commute from the metropolitan edge to the inner-
suburbs. In return, a signiﬁcant number of those workers made the reverse commuting
from the inner-suburbs to the edge cities.
   The negative endogenous interaction eﬀect conﬁrms the commuting exchange
between paired suburban conjunctures. It implies that the number of in-commuting in
a location would only increase if in-commuting in the neighboring areas decreased.
This strengthens previous ﬁndings that the inter-suburban commuting destination is
centralized only in several places. The mechanism is explained by the increasing in-com-
muting numbers in the areas surrounded by municipalities with lower unemployment
rates. Another exogenous interaction for in-commuting exists with wage levels and
unemployment rates. While higher wages are strongly associated with the existence of
a manufacturing subcenter in the outer-suburb, commuting for non-manufacturing
employment has created a negative direct eﬀect on wages. On the contrary, the reverse
commuting to a lower-wage area provides a positive indirect impact on the surrounding
areas. Hence, the manufacturing-led post-suburbanization process in the JMA seems to
have beneﬁted only certain suburban groups.
   The driving forces of inter-suburban commuting in the JMA tend to be similar in
many ways to those of traditional commuting. From a suburban viewpoint, the panel spe-
ciﬁcation of the best traditional commuting model was the RE with W3. The traditional
commuting in the JMA is strongly aﬀected by housing costs, either in the suburbs them-
selves or in their neighboring areas. A positive housing cost coeﬃcient and a negative
spatial lag of a distance suggested that traditional commuting decays with the growing
distance from the CBD, conﬁrming the monocentric urban model. Municipalities adja-
cent to Jakarta, such as Bekasi, Tangerang, Depok, and South Tangerang, have become
prominent residential locations for traditional commuters. Those areas have more
expensive housing costs due to their proximity to Jakarta, which also made the eﬀect
of neighboring inner-suburbs with similar high housing costs positive. However, the
                                                                  URBAN GEOGRAPHY        19


model does not show a signiﬁcant spatial lag and spatial error, suggesting that both
endogenous and error interaction do not inﬂuence traditional commuting. In other
words, the dynamic of density and housing costs are suﬃcient to explain the traditional
commuting pattern in the JMA.


Discussion
From a spatial point of view, the inter-suburban commuting in the JMA exogenously
interacts with neighboring urban heterogeneity. Commuting between suburban areas
is strongly aﬀected by the changing urban environment (density, housing cost, wage
level, and unemployment rate) in its surrounding areas, and neighboring suburbs have
become their complementary. Main inter-suburban commuting ﬂows occur laterally
between adjacent municipalities along the toll road corridors due to the increased
private vehicle usage (up to 26 percent during 2008-2015). More out-commuting
occurs from the outer-suburbs of the JMA to the inner-suburbs, showing that the
inner-suburbs have achieved a diﬀerent attractiveness than the CBD and outer-
suburbs. It also indicates that the commuting pattern corresponds to employment con-
centration along the corridor (Lowe, 1998). The sizeable reverse commuting numbers
from the inner- to the outer-suburbs were also considerably high, explaining the positive
inﬂuence of the housing cost factors on the out-commuting model.
   The eﬀect of new employment opportunities and wages on inter-suburban commut-
ing is opposite to what has been found elsewhere, diﬀerentiating the JMA from other
countries. Signiﬁcant manufacturing employment emerged in the eastern and the
western parts of the JMA’s outer-suburbs (Hudalah et al., 2013). In line with Timothy
and Wheaton (2001), outer-suburbs have also been the fastest growth- and highest
wage zones across the JMA. However, several problems arose due to the services and
commercial activities’ re-concentration in Jakarta between 2006 and 2016 (Sadewo
et al., 2018). First, many non-manufacturing workers seek employment elsewhere
because it is rarely found in the Bekasi and the Tangerang Regencies. While conforming
to the role of industrial land-use in promoting out-commuting (Liu et al., 2020), it may
also disprove the reduced signiﬁcance of residential location importance (Elldér, 2014).
   Secondly, higher wages seem to have attracted commuters from inner-suburbs but did
not reduce out-commuting from the outer-suburbs. The negative inﬂuence of wages on
commuting is inconsistent with some previous studies (e.g. Renkow & Hoover, 2000;
Suh, 1988; Tscharaktschiew & Hirte, 2010). The anomaly could be explained by the
JMAs’ commuters characterized by high education with high-end commercial and
service employment preferences (Raijaya & Chotib, 2020). Therefore, they have to seek
employment in other suburbs. The case of the JMA shows that a high suburban wage
rate does not always beneﬁt all residents because Sadewo et al. (2018) ﬁnding show
that services ﬁrms tend to re-concentrate in the core city. Thus, signiﬁcant travel activi-
ties to the core are inevitable for accessing speciﬁc service needs.
   A strong interdependency between the adjacent suburban job locations is reﬂected in
the spillover eﬀect of independent variables. Density and housing costs inﬂuencing out-
commuting ﬂows are almost twice as much as the direct eﬀects (feedback). The negative
spillover eﬀect of density shows that the high population density which characterizes the
inner-suburban areas would lower out-commuting ﬂows in the neighboring inner-
20      E. SADEWO ET AL.


suburbs. For the housing costs, the opposite eﬀect occurred, making only inner-suburbs
with the highest density, like Bekasi and Tangerang, which are close to the expensive resi-
dential areas like Depok and South Tangerang, capable of sending out commuters in a
considerable number. Meanwhile, the higher wages in the post-suburban areas may
negatively inﬂuence in-commuting ﬂows. Consequently, the spillover goes to the neigh-
boring areas and creates a reverse impact. As urban development in the JMA spreads
along the toll road corridors (Firman, 2011), the municipalities passed by these corridors
would also beneﬁt from increased employment opportunities. However, this could also
bring potential problems in the future because inter-suburban commuters share the
same corridors with the traditional and reverse commuters.
   Inter-suburban commuting in a particular suburb can be determined by the corre-
sponding land-use pattern in its surrounding areas. For instance, the land-use mix of
industrial and commercial centers potentially attracts more in-commuting (Liu et al.,
2020). However, manufacturing post-suburbs like Bekasi and Tangerang Regencies
have higher minimum regional wage rates than Jakarta. For service ﬁrms, this situation
diminishes the potential for lower production costs if located near the manufacturing
post-suburbs. Thus, it prevents manufacturing and service ﬁrms from agglomerating
in JMA’s post-suburbs. The service ﬁrms are more likely to be located in the inner-
suburbs because although it has a slightly lower level of wages compared to the post-sub-
urbia, the inner-suburban areas may still provide more amenities due to their proximity
to Jakarta.


Conclusion
This article explores how the underlying urban form factors inﬂuence inter-suburban
commuting in the Jakarta Metropolitan Area (JMA). The factors analyzed in this
article represent the unequal distribution of JMA peripheral characteristics, including
population growth and density, household structure, employment opportunity, unem-
ployment rate, wages, housing costs, and transportation costs. This article applies the
spatial panel regression approach to examine the spatio-temporal eﬀects of these
factors on inter-suburban commuting activity in the JMA between 2008 and 2015.
   This paper contributes to a better understanding of intra-metropolitan mobility by
providing empirical evidence of the eﬀect of employment decentralization and changing
suburban environments on inter-suburban commuting patterns. The post-suburbaniza-
tion process is expected to mediate the transformation of suburbs from metropolitan hin-
terlands into multifunctional cities (Phelps & Wood, 2011). However, the case of the
JMA indicates that manufacturing-led post-suburbanization has a contrasting impact.
While it does not always reduce out-commuting, it forces certain groups of localities
to seek jobs elsewhere, potentially leading to a worsening job-housing balance in JMA
and other metropolises with a similar trajectory of post-suburbanization.
   Several policy recommendations can be put forward in line with the analysis results.
First, the eﬀectiveness of wage policy as a commuting attractor should be accompanied
by employment diversity policy incentives. To better accommodate the impact of the
amplifying manufacturing employment clusters phenomenon on urban land-use
change, industrial park development needs to be integrated into land-use planning
policy. Land-use integration shall be coupled with decentralized transport infrastructure
                                                                        URBAN GEOGRAPHY         21


planning at the local level to improve the connection between inner- and outer-suburbs.
A more robust suburban transport infrastructure can anticipate the incoming inter-sub-
urban commuting growth due to increased horizontal mobility between outer-suburbs.
Furthermore, an integrated transit-oriented development surrounding the JMA
suburbs should be considered a critical urban development strategy to reduce car depen-
dence while at the same time supporting inter-suburban mobility growth in the future.
   Irrespective of the ﬁnding, this article is subject to several limitations. First, municipal
scale administrative delineation for JMAs’ urban classiﬁcation may not describe subur-
ban land-use eﬀectively. Following Sadewo et al. (2020), suburban employment centers
cover only a limited suburban area. Future studies should explore this method at a
smaller spatial scale to produce more accurate land-use and spatial interaction
between suburbs. Another limitation is the use of commuting ﬂows in the model.
Most commuting studies use time or length variables as dependent variables to
provide a more precise illustration of spatial friction. Therefore, future suburban com-
muting studies should try to have a speciﬁc time and length diﬀerentiation between tra-
ditional and inter-suburban commuting and compare it to their models.


Acknowledgements
This research is supported by Bappenas PHRD IV Program (Agreement Note No. 35/Ses/NP06/
2016). The authors are grateful for the insightful discussion with Prof. Ben Derudder. The authors
are thankful for the comments oﬀered by the anonymous reviewers and editor. The generosity and
expertise of one and all have improved this study in innumerable ways; those errors that inevitably
remain are entirely our own responsibility.



Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author(s).



Funding
This research is funded by ITB Research Program 2020 category B.



ORCID
Erie Sadewo     http://orcid.org/0000-0003-4666-3523



References
Aguiléra, A. (2005). Growth in commuting distances in French polycentric metropolitan areas:
  Paris, lyon and marseille. Urban Studies, 42(9), 1537–1547. https://doi.org/10.1080/
  00420980500185389
Baltagi, B. H. (2008). Econometric analysis of panel data. John Wiley & Sons.
Baltagi, B. H., Heun Song, S., Cheol Jung, B., & Koh, W. (2007). Testing for serial correlation,
  spatial autocorrelation and random eﬀects using panel data. Journal of Econometrics, 140(1),
  5–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeconom.2006.09.001
22       E. SADEWO ET AL.


Baltagi, B. H., Song, S. H., & Koh, W. (2003). Testing panel data regression models with spatial
   error correlation. Journal of Econometrics, 117(1), 123–150. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0304-
   4076(03)00120-9
Baum-Snow, N. (2010). Changes in transportation infrastructure and commuting patterns in US
   metropolitan areas, 1960–2000. American Economic Review, 100(2), 378–382. https://doi.org/
   10.1257/aer.100.2.378
Beauregard, R. A. (1995). Edge cities: Peripheralizing the center. Urban Geography, 16(8), 708–721.
   https://doi.org/10.2747/0272-3638.16.8.708
Berliant, M., & Tabuchi, T. (2015). Equilibrium commuting (Munich Personal RePEc Archive No.
   63504). https://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/67689/
Bontje, M. (2004). From suburbia to post-suburbia in the Netherlands: Potentials and threats for
   sustainable regional development. Journal of Housing and the Built Environment, 19(1), 25–47.
   https://doi.org/10.1023/B:JOHO.0000017705.30156.32
Bontje, M. (2007). Deconcentration and commuter traﬃc: Trends and policies in the Netherlands.
   Informationen Zur Raumentwicklung, 2(3), 141–148.
Bontje, M., & Burdack, J. (2005). Edge cities, European-style: Examples from Paris and the rand-
   stad. Cities, 22(4), 317–330. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cities.2005.01.007
Borck, R., & Wrede, M. (2009). Subsidies for intracity and intercity commuting. Journal of Urban
   Economics, 66(1), 25–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2009.02.003
Borsdorf, A. (2004). On the way to post-suburbia? Changing structures in the outskirts of
   European cities. In A. Borsdorf, & P. Zembri (Eds.), European cities: Insights on outskirts (pp.
   7–30). Brussels: European Cooperation in the Field of Scientiﬁc and Technical Research.
Buchanan, N., Barnett, R., Kingham, S., & Johnston, D. (2006). The eﬀect of urban growth on com-
   muting patterns in christchurch, New Zealand. Journal of Transport Geography, 14(5), 342–354.
   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2005.10.008
Cahyadi, R., & Surtiari, G. A. K. (2016). Penduduk dan pembangunan perumahan di jabodetabek:
   Tantangan pengembangan megapolitan Jakarta. Jurnal Kependudukan Indonesia, 4(1), 55–72.
   https://doi.org/10.14203/jki.v4i1.177
Clark, W. A. V., & Kuijpers-Linde, M. (1994). Commuting in restructuring urban regions. Urban
   Studies, 31(3), 465–483. https://doi.org/10.1080/00420989420080431
Congdon, P., & Lloyd, C. D. (2012). A spatial random-eﬀects model for interzone ﬂows:
   Commuting in northern Ireland. Journal of Applied Statistics, 39(1), 199–213. https://doi.org/
   10.1080/02664763.2011.580336
Copiello, S. (2020). Spatial dependence of housing values in northeastern Italy. Cities, 96, 102444.
   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cities.2019.102444
Dharmowijoyo, D. B. E., Susilo, Y. O., & Karlström, A. (2014). Day-to-Day interpersonal and
   intrapersonal variability of individuals’ activity spaces in a developing country. Environment
   and Planning B: Planning and Design, 41(6), 1063–1076. https://doi.org/10.1068/b130067p
Drobne, S., Rajar, T., & Lisec, A. (2013). Dynamics of migration and commuting to the urban
   centres of Slovenia, 2000-2011. Geodetski Vestnik, 57(2), 333–353. https://doi.org/10.15292/
   geodetski-vestnik.2013.02.333-353.
Elhorst, J. P. (2010). Spatial panel data models. In M. M. Fischer, & A. Getis (Eds.), Handbook of
   applied spatial analysis: Software tools, methods and applications (pp. 377–407). Springer.
   https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-03647-7_19
Elhorst, J. P. (2014). Linear spatial dependence models for cross-section data. In J. P. Elhorst (Ed.),
   Spatial econometrics (pp. 5–36). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-
   40340-8_2
Elldér, E. (2014). Residential location and daily travel distances: The inﬂuence of trip purpose.
   Journal of Transport Geography, 34, 121–130. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2013.11.008
Engelfriet, L., & Koomen, E. (2017). The impact of urban form on commuting in large Chinese
   cities. Transportation, 1269–1295. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11116-017-9762-6
Farda, M., & Lubis, H. (2018). Transportation system development and challenge in Jakarta metro-
   politan area, Indonesia. International Journal of Sustainable Transportation Technology, 1(2),
   42–50. https://doi.org/10.31427/IJSTT.2018.1.2.2
                                                                         URBAN GEOGRAPHY          23


Firman, T. (2011). Post-suburban elements in an Asian extended metropolitan region: The case of
   jabodetabek (Jakarta metropolitan area). In N. A. Phelps, & F. Wu (Eds.), International perspec-
   tives on suburbanization: A post-suburban world? (pp. 195–209). Palgrave Macmillan UK.
   https://doi.org/10.1057/9780230308626_11
Firman, T., & Fahmi, F. Z. (2017). The privatization of metropolitan Jakarta’s (jabodetabek) urban
   fringes: The early stages of “post-suburbanization” in Indonesia. Journal of the American
   Planning Association, 83(1), 68–79. https://doi.org/10.1080/01944363.2016.1249010
Ganning, J. P., Baylis, K., & Lee, B. (2013). Spread And backwash eﬀects For nonmetropolitan
   communities In The U.S. Journal of Regional Science, 53(3), 464–480. https://doi.org/10.1111/
   jors.12026
Garreau, J. (1991). Edge city: Life on the New frontier. Achor Books.
Goetz, S. J., Han, Y., Findeis, J. L., & Brasier, K. J. (2010). U.S. Commuting networks and economic
   growth: Measurement and implications for spatial policy. Growth and Change, 41(2), 276–302.
   https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2257.2010.00527.x
Griﬃth, D. A., & Jones, K. G. (1980). Explorations into the relationship between spatial structure
   and spatial interaction. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space, 12(2), 187–201.
   https://doi.org/10.1068/a120187
Gutiérrez, J., & García-Palomares, J. C. (2007). New spatial patterns of mobility within the metro-
   politan area of Madrid: Towards more complex and dispersed ﬂow networks. Journal of
   Transport Geography, 15(1), 18–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2006.01.002
Harris, R. (2010). Meaningful types in a world of suburbs. In M. Clapson, & R. Hutchison (Eds.),
   Suburbanization in global society (Vol. 10 (pp. 15–47). Emerald Group Publishing Limited.
   https://doi.org/10.1108/S1047-0042(2010)0000010004
Helbich, M., & Leitner, M. (2009). Spatial analysis of the urban-to-rural migration determinants in
   the viennese metropolitan area. A transition from suburbia to postsuburbia? Applied Spatial
   Analysis and Policy, 2(3), 237–260. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12061-009-9026-8
Horner, M. W. (2004). Spatial dimensions of urban commuting: A review of major issues and their
   implications for future geographic research. The Professional Geographer, 56(2), 160–173.
   https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0033-0124.2004.05602002.x
Horner, M. W., & Meﬀord, J. N. (2007). Investigating urban spatial mismatch using Job–housing
   indicators to model home–work separation. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space,
   39(6), 1420–1440. https://doi.org/10.1068/a37443
Hu, Y., & Wang, F. (2016). Temporal trends of intraurban commuting in Baton Rouge, 1990–2010.
   Annals of the American Association of Geographers, 106(2), 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1080/
   00045608.2015.1113117
Hu, Y., Wang, F., & Wilmot, C. G. (2017). Commuting variability by wage groups in Baton Rouge,
   1990–2010. Papers in Applied Geography, 3(1), 14–29. https://doi.org/10.1080/23754931.2016.
   1248577
Hudalah, D., & Firman, T. (2012). Beyond property: Industrial estates and post-suburban trans-
   formation in Jakarta metropolitan region. Cities, 29(1), 40–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cities.
   2011.07.003
Hudalah, D., Viantari, D., Firman, T., & Woltjer, J. (2013). Industrial land development and man-
   ufacturing deconcentration in greater Jakarta. Urban Geography, 34(7), 950–971. https://doi.
   org/10.1080/02723638.2013.783281
Jun, M.-J. (2020). The eﬀects of polycentric evolution on commute times in a polycentric compact
   city: A case of the Seoul metropolitan area. Cities, 98, 102587. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cities.
   2019.102587
Kling, R., Olin, S. C., & Poster, M. (1995). The emergence of postsuburbia: An introduction. In R.
   Kling, S. C. Olin, & M. Poster (Eds.), Postsuburban California: The transformation of Orange
   county since World War II (pp. 1–30). University of California Press.
Kofoed, A. (2020). An Introduction to Colorado-Wyoming Commuting Patterns (p. 68)
   [Wyoming Workforce Annual Report]. Research & Planning Wyoming DWS.
24       E. SADEWO ET AL.


Koster, H. R. A., & Rouwendal, J. (2013). Agglomeration, commuting costs, and the internal struc-
  ture of cities. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 43(2), 352–366. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  regsciurbeco.2012.09.001
Kurnia, A. A., Rustiadi, E., Fauzi, A., Pravitasari, A. E., Saizen, I., & Ženka, J. (2022).
  Understanding industrial land development on rural-urban land transformation of Jakarta
  megacity’s outer suburb. Land, 11(5), 670. https://doi.org/10.3390/land11050670
Lang, R. E., Sanchez, T. W., & Oner, A. C. (2009). Beyond edge city: Oﬃce geography in the New
  metropolis. Urban Geography, 30(7), 726–755. https://doi.org/10.2747/0272-3638.30.7.726
LeSage, J. P., & Pace, R. K. (2009). Introduction to spatial econometrics. Chapman & Hall/CRC.
Levy, C. (2017). Urban development in the global south. In H. Veltmeyer, & P. Bowles (Eds.), The
  essential guide to critical development studies (1st ed (pp. 328–337). Routledge.
Liu, Y., Fang, F., & Jing, Y. (2020). How urban land use inﬂuences commuting ﬂows in wuhan,
  central China: A mobile phone signaling data perspective. Sustainable Cities and Society, 53,
  101914. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2019.101914
Lowe, J. C. (1998). Patterns of spatial dispersion in metropolitan commuting. Urban Geography,
  19(3), 232–253. https://doi.org/10.2747/0272-3638.19.3.232
Lucy, W. H., & Phillips, D. L. (1997). The post-suburban era comes to richmond: City decline, sub-
  urban transition, and exurban growth. Landscape and Urban Planning, 36(4), 259–275. https://
  doi.org/10.1016/S0169-2046(96)00358-1
Masucci, A. P., Serras, J., Johansson, A., & Batty, M. (2013). Gravity versus radiation models: On
  the importance of scale and heterogeneity in commuting ﬂows. Physical Review E, 88(2),
  022812. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.88.022812
McGee, T. G. (1991). The emergence of desakota regions in Asia: Expanding a hypothesis. In N. S.
  Ginsburg, B. Koppel, & T. G. McGee (Eds.), The extended metropolis: Settlement transition Is
  Asia (pp. 3–25). University of Hawaii Press.
Miller, E. V. (2018). Gender diﬀerences in intercity commuting patterns in the Fox river valley,
  illinois, 1912 – 1936. Journal of Historical Geography, 60, 89–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhg.
  2018.02.015
Millo, G., & Piras, G. (2012). splm: spatial panel data models in R. Journal of Statistical Software,
  47(1), 1–38. https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v047.i01.
Momeni, E., & Antipova, A. (2022). A micro-level analysis of commuting and urban land using the
  simpson’s index and socio-demographic factors. Applied Geography, 145, 102755. https://doi.
  org/10.1016/j.apgeog.2022.102755
Pace, R. K., & LeSage, J. P. (2008). A spatial hausman test. Economics Letters, 101(3), 282–284.
  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econlet.2008.09.003
Partridge, M. D., Ali, K., & Olfert, M. R. (2010). Rural-to-Urban commuting: Three degrees of
  integration. Growth and Change, 41(2), 303–335. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2257.2010.
  00528.x
Phelps, N. A., & Wood, A. M. (2011). The New post-suburban politics? Urban Studies, 48(12),
  2591–2610. https://doi.org/10.1177/0042098011411944
Phelps, N. A., & Wu, F. (2011). Conclusion: Post-suburban worlds? In N. A. Phelps, & F. Wu
  (Eds.), International perspectives on suburbanization: A post-suburban world? (pp. 195–209).
  Palgrave Macmillan UK. https://doi.org/10.1057/9780230308626_11
Pike, A. (2022). Coping with deindustrialization in the global north and south. International
  Journal of Urban Sciences, 26(1), 1–22. https://doi.org/10.1080/12265934.2020.1730225
Raijaya, I. G. A. A. K. M., & Chotib, C. (2020). The worker characteristic: The decision to commute
  or Not. Jurnal Litbang Sukowati : Media Penelitian dan Pengembangan, 3(2), 12–12. https://doi.
  org/10.32630/sukowati.v3i2.133
Renkow, M., & Hoover, D. (2000). Commuting, migration, and rural-urban population dynamics.
  Journal of Regional Science, 40(2), 261–287. https://doi.org/10.1111/0022-4146.00174
Richardson, H. W., & Gordon, P. (2004). U.S. Population and employment trends and sprawl
  issues. In H. W. Richardson, & C.-H. C. Bae (Eds.), Urban sprawl in western europeand the
  United States (1st ed. (pp. 344). Routledge.
                                                                          URBAN GEOGRAPHY          25


Roback, J. (1982). Wages, rents, and the quality of life. Journal of Political Economy, 90(6),
  1257–1278. https://doi.org/10.1086/261120
Rukmana, D., Fahmi, F. Z., & Firman, T. (2018). Suburbanization in Asia: A focus on Jakarta. In B.
  Hanlon, & T. J. Vicino (Eds.), The routledge companion to the suburbs (1st ed). (pp. 110–120).
  Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315266442-10
Sadewo, E. (2021). Dampak post-suburbanisasi terhadap pola komuter di jabodetabek. Simpul
  Perencana, 40, 74–84. http://pusbindiklatren.bappenas.go.id/ﬁle/bukuterbit/simpul-40.pdf.
Sadewo, E., & Syabri, I. (2018). Perbandingan pendekatan reformasi metropolitan dalam menye-
  lesaikan isu komuter di Jakarta metropolitan area. Plano Madani : Jurnal Perencanaan Wilayah
  dan Kota, 7(1), 89–105. https://doi.org/10.24252/planomadani.v7i1a9
Sadewo, E., Syabri, I., Antipova, A., Pradono, & Hudalah, D. (2020). Using morphological and
  functional polycentricity analyses to study the Indonesian urban spatial structure: The case of
  medan, Jakarta, and denpasar. Asian Geographer, 47–71. https://doi.org/10.1080/10225706.
  2020.1737829
Sadewo, E., Syabri, I., & Pradono (2018). Beyond the early stage of post-suburbanization: Evidence
  from urban spatial transformation in jabodetabek metropolitan area. IOP Conference Series:
  Earth and Environmental Science, 158, 012040. https://doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/158/1/
  012040
Schmidt, C. (2014). Optimal commuting and migration decisions under commuting cost uncer-
  tainty. Urban Studies, 51(3), 477–492. https://doi.org/10.1177/0042098013498286
Seya, H., Yamagata, Y., & Tsutsumi, M. (2013). Automatic selection of a spatial weight matrix in
  spatial econometrics: Application to a spatial hedonic approach. Regional Science and Urban
  Economics, 43(3), 429–444. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.regsciurbeco.2013.02.002
Small, K. A., & Verhoef, E. T. (2007). The economics of urban transportation. Routledge.
Soja, E. W. (2000). Postmetropolis: Critical studies of cities and regions. Wiley.
Soja, E. W. (2011). Beyond postmetropolis. Urban Geography, 32(4), 451–469. https://doi.org/10.
  2747/0272-3638.32.4.451
Song, Y., Shao, G., Song, X., Liu, Y., Pan, L., & Ye, H. (2017). The relationships between urban
  form and urban commuting: An empirical study in China. Sustainability, 9(7), 1150. https://
  doi.org/10.3390/su9071150
Spadon, G., de Carvalho, A. C. P. L. F., Rodrigues-Jr, J. F., & Alves, L. G. A. (2019). Reconstructing
  commuters network using machine learning and urban indicators. Scientiﬁc Reports, 9(1),
  11801. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-48295-x
Sugiarto Miwa, T., Sato, H., & Morikawa, T. (2014). Transportation expenditure frontier models in
  Jakarta metropolitan area. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 138, 148–158. https://doi.
  org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.07.190
Suh, S. H. (1988). The possibility and impossibility of intercity commuting. Journal of Urban
  Economics, 23(1), 86–100. https://doi.org/10.1016/0094-1190(88)90007-1
Sultana, S. (2000). Some eﬀects of employment centers on commuting times in the atlanta metro-
  politan area, 1990. Southeastern Geographer, 40(2), 225–233. https://doi.org/10.1353/sgo.2000.
  0020
Sultana, S. (2002). Job/housing imbalance and commuting time in the atlanta metropolitan area:
  Exploration of causes of longer commuting time. Urban Geography, 23(8), 728–749. https://doi.
  org/10.2747/0272-3638.23.8.728
Sultana, S., & Weber, J. (2007). Journey-to-Work patterns in the Age of sprawl: Evidence from
  Two midsize southern metropolitan areas*. The Professional Geographer, 59(2), 193–208.
  https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9272.2007.00607.x
Sultana, S., & Weber, J. (2014). The nature of urban growth and the commuting transition: Endless
  sprawl or a growth wave? Urban Studies, 51(3), 544–576. https://doi.org/10.1177/
  0042098013498284
Susantono, B., Santosa, W., & Budiyono, A. (2011). Kepemilikan kendaraan dan pola perjalanan di
  wilayah jabodetabek. Jurnal Transportasi, 11(3), 153–162.
26       E. SADEWO ET AL.


Susilo, Y. O., Santosa, W., Joewono, T. B., & Parikesit, D. (2007). A reﬂection of motorization and
  public transport in Jakarta metropolitan area. IATSS Research, 31(1), 59–68. https://doi.org/10.
  1016/S0386-1112(14)60184-9
Timothy, D., & Wheaton, W. C. (2001). Intra-Urban wage variation, employment location, and
  commuting times. Journal of Urban Economics, 50, 338–366. https://doi.org/10.1006/juec.
  2001.2220
Tscharaktschiew, S., & Hirte, G. (2010). How does the household structure shape the urban
  economy? Regional Science and Urban Economics, 40(6), 498–516. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
  regsciurbeco.2010.06.006
Tzaninis, Y., & Boterman, W. (2018). Beyond the urban–suburban dichotomy. City, 22(1), 43–62.
  https://doi.org/10.1080/13604813.2018.1432143
Viguié, V. (2015). Cross-commuting and housing prices in a polycentric modeling of cities (Working
  Paper WP 2015.09). French Association of Environmental and Resource Economist. http://
  faere.fr/pub/PolicyPapers/Viguie_FAERE_PP2015.03.pdf
Watkins, A. R. (2016). Commuting ﬂows and labour market structure: Modelling journey to work
  behaviour in an urban environment. Growth and Change, 47(4), 612–630. https://doi.org/10.
  1111/grow.12156
Weber, J., & Sultana, S. (2008). Employment sprawl, race and the journey to work in Birmingham,
  alabama. Southeastern Geographer, 48(1), 53–74. https://doi.org/10.1353/sgo.0.0014
Wrede, M. (2015). A continuous spatial choice logit model of a polycentric city. Regional Science
  and Urban Economics, 53, 68–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.regsciurbeco.2015.05.001
Wu, F., & Phelps, N. A. (2008). From suburbia to post-suburbia in China? Aspects of the trans-
  formation of the Beijing and Shanghai global city regions. Built Environment, 34(4), 464–481.
  https://doi.org/10.2148/benv.34.4.464
Zheng, S., Sun, W., Wu, J., & Kahn, M. E. (2017). The birth of edge cities in China: Measuring the
  eﬀects of industrial parks policy. Journal of Urban Economics, 100, 80–103. https://doi.org/10.
  1016/j.jue.2017.05.002
