This article was downloaded by: [University of Colorado at
Boulder Libraries]
On: 23 December 2014, At: 13:52
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number:
1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer
Street, London W1T 3JH, UK



                               Bulletin of Indonesian
                               Economic Studies
                               Publication details, including
                               instructions for authors and subscription
                               information:
                               http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/cbie20

                               The Dynamics of
                               Jabotabek Development
                                                    a                b
                               J. Vernon Henderson & Ari Kuncoro
                               a
                                Brown University, Providence RI
                               National Bureau of Economic Research ,
                               USA
                               b
                                University of Indonesia
                               Published online: 19 Aug 2006.


To cite this article: J. Vernon Henderson & Ari Kuncoro (1996) The
Dynamics of Jabotabek Development, Bulletin of Indonesian Economic
Studies, 32:1, 71-95, DOI: 10.1080/00074919612331336898

To link to this article: http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/00074919612331336898



PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of
all the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications
on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our
licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as
to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of
                                                                                        the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication
                                                                                        are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views
                                                                                        of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
                                                                                        should not be relied upon and should be independently verified
                                                                                        with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not
                                                                                        be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands,
                                                                                        costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
                                                                                        howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with,




Downloaded by [University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries] at 13:52 23 December 2014
                                                                                        in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

                                                                                        This article may be used for research, teaching, and private
                                                                                        study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction,
                                                                                        redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply,
                                                                                        or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden.
                                                                                        Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://
                                                                                        www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions
                                                                                        Bulletin of Indonesian E m n a i c Studies       Vol32 No 1, April 1996. pp. 7l-95
                                                                                                                                     ~




                                                                                                       THE DYNAMICS OF JABOTABEK




Downloaded by [University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries] at 13:52 23 December 2014
                                                                                                             DEVELOPMENT

                                                                                                                        J. Vernon Henderson.
                                                                                                               Brown University, Providence Rl
                                                                                                          National Bureau of Economic Research, USA

                                                                                                                              Ari Kuncoro
                                                                                                                       Uniuersity of Indonesia

                                                                                                                          Damhuri Nasution
                                                                                                                       University of Indonesia


                                                                                              This paper examines the dynamics of urban development of the
                                                                                              Jakarta metropohtan region, called Jabotabek, from 1980 through the
                                                                                              early 1990s. We focus on the rapidly changing spatial allocation of
                                                                                              residences and business, finding that Jabotabek is following
                                                                                              expected developmental patterns but faces special and some
                                                                                              critical problems Population densities remain unusually high and
                                                                                              urban development is hindered by very poor land market
                                                                                              institutions-weakly defined property rights particularly for
                                                                                              traditional low income residents, complete lack of active land use
                                                                                              planning, and relatively low lnfraStNCture investments. Indushy is
                                                                                              rapidly suburbanising to take of advantage of low land prices and
                                                                                              wages in suburban Botabek. With toll road constructmn east and
                                                                                              west from the city, within the five-year period 1986-1991, Jabotabek
                                                                                              moved from being a monocentric city where core city industrial
                                                                                              activity dominated to a predominantly multi-centred city. These
                                                                                              developments and implicit government policy have hurt small-
                                                                                              scale industry, which ultimately will hlnder the whole
                                                                                              development process. Issues of spahal mlsmatch, where low income
                                                                                              workers' residences and workplaces become mordinately spatially
                                                                                              separated due to government policies in land markets, herald
                                                                                              increasing problems of urban underemployment and social unrest.



                                                                                        *The authors acknowledge the helpful comments of two anonymous refeerees.
                                                                                        72                  J. Vernon Hendenon, Ari Kuncom and Damhuri Nasution

                                                                                        The urbanised population of the metropolitan area of Jakarta, known as
                                                                                        Jabotabek, grew at an average rate of 5.9% per year in 198CL1990.' For
                                                                                        such a large metropolis, that is a very rapid growth rate, both in
                                                                                        international terms and relative to other metro areas in Indonesia




Downloaded by [University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries] at 13:52 23 December 2014
                                                                                        (World Bank 1993). The resulting centralisation of urban resources is
                                                                                        discussed in Henderson and Kuncoro (1996), where the implicit
                                                                                        subsidisation of industrial location in Jabotabek and the two or three
                                                                                        other largest metro areas in Indonesia is analysed.
                                                                                            The present paper focuses on Jabotabeks spatial development in
                                                                                        response to this massive infusion of population and the corresponding
                                                                                        investment in infrashucture. Jabotabek is responding to urban growth
                                                                                        with the same patterns of population and industrial decentralisation
                                                                                        and suburbanisation that we are familiar with from other countries
                                                                                        (see, for example, Ingram and Carol1 1981). We analyse these patterns
                                                                                        and point out some unusual features: rather high population densities
                                                                                        near the centre combined with urban sprawl at the fringes; rapid
                                                                                        suburbanisation of formal sector manufacturing; and rapidly changing
                                                                                        patterns of land use. We explore these features by looking at the
                                                                                        evolving spabal distribution of both population and industrial activity,
                                                                                        discussing reasons for Jobotabeks unusual features and pointing out the
                                                                                        policy-institutional questions they raise.


                                                                                        POPULATION DISPERSION

                                                                                        Density and Land Use Change
                                                                                        In map 1, we picture the Jabotabek area, so the reader has in mind the
                                                                                        basic layout of the metropolitan region for reference throughout the
                                                                                        paper. Jakarta is a coastal city, with a major harbour. The heavy dotted
                                                                                        line in the map is the 1990 boundary of urban Jabotabek;z the very
                                                                                        heavy solid line indicates the borders of the core city of DKI Jakarta,



                                                                                        'The acronym 'Jabotabek' is formed from the names of Jakarta and the
                                                                                        neighbouring kabupaten of Bogor, Tangerang and Bekasi. The term 'Botabek is
                                                                                        used for the areas of Jabotabek that lie outside the Special Region (OKI) of
                                                                                        Jakarta.
                                                                                        2 0 u r sample includes all kecamatan with signihcant papulation densities and is
                                                                                        based on the data and analysis of population densities at the desa level for 1990
                                                                                        in GO1 (1993, flgure 1.2).However, the kec~matanboundaries in map 1 are 1986
                                                                                        boundaries, so as to correspond to those in map 2, which necessarily uses 1986
                                                                                        boundaries. Between 1986 and 1990 a number of kecamatan were split up.
                                                                                        The Dvnamics of JabotabekDevelovment                                              73

                                                                                                                     MAP 1 labotabek"




Downloaded by [University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries] at 13:52 23 December 2014
                                                                                                                                        ...' Urban Jabotabek
                                                                                                                                         *   Monas
                                                                                                                                             DKI Jakarta boundary
                                                                                                                                             Knbupatm/kotamadya
                                                                                                                                             boundaries
                                                                                                                                             f i r n o f a n boundaries


                                                                                        aKecnmatnn boundaries shown are those in use at the time of the 1986 Economic
                                                                                        Census.



                                                                                        while those of the Central Business Area of Jakarta Pusat, around the
                                                                                        Kational Monument (Monas), and of other kabupaten and kotamadyn, are
                                                                                        marked by the medium solid line.
                                                                                           Despite the initial appearance of major intra-city thoroughfares and
                                                                                        large parks and squares, Jabotabek has a high population density,
                                                                                        especially within DKI Jakarta. In 1980, density near the centre averaged
                                                                                        around 42,000 residents per square kilometre. In 1970, with
                                                                                        74                    J. Vernon Hendemn, A n Kunmro and Damhuri Nasution

                                                                                                   FIGURE 1 Population Density Gradhtfor Urban ]abotabek,
                                                                                                             Excludmg K o f a d y a Bogor S e p e n t ”
                                                                                                   Population
                                                                                                     per ha




Downloaded by [University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries] at 13:52 23 December 2014
                                                                                                          0          2          4          6             8
                                                                                                                 Distance from centre (in 3.4 km units)
                                                                                                                 _ _ . 1980
                                                                                                                       .                   - 1990
                                                                                        aE’Excludessegment of density gradient where density rises again near kotomadyu
                                                                                        Bogor.
                                                                                                   FIGURE 2 Population Density Gradient for Urban labotabek,
                                                                                                            Including Kotamadya Bogor Segmenta
                                                                                                    Populahon
                                                                                                      Der ha




                                                                                                      n
                                                                                                      ”   0      2       4      6      8       10    12      hior
                                                                                                                bistance from centre (m 3.4 !an units)
                                                                                                                 . . . . 1980           - 1990
                                                                                        ‘The heavy dots in the figure indicate where the gradient switches from
                                                                                        negative to positive slope, and where Bogor is located.
                                                                                        The Dynamics of Jabotabek Development                                  75

                                                                                        populations similar to that of Jabotabek in 1980, metro areas such as
                                                                                        SZo Paulo, Buenos Aires and Mexico City had centre city densities of
                                                                                        18,000, 33,000 and 44,000 respectively (Ingram and Carol1 1981).
                                                                                        Jabotabek is in the unenviable position of mimicking Mexico City.




Downloaded by [University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries] at 13:52 23 December 2014
                                                                                            While high for a large metropolitan area in a developing country,
                                                                                        Jabotabek'spopulation density at the centre is declining. Figures 1 and 2
                                                                                        plot standard 1990 and 1980 population density gradients for
                                                                                        Jabotabek, depicting expotential relationships from regression results
                                                                                        reported in table 1. The gradients are estimated for the 78 kecamatan
                                                                                        (based on 1990 definitions) of urban Jabotabek, as listed in appendix A.
                                                                                        The results for kotamadya Bogor are excluded from figure 1, in order to
                                                                                        show the shape of the gradient without the effect of Bogor as a second
                                                                                        centre of population pull. In figure 2, for the interested reader, we add
                                                                                        the kotamadya Bogor component back into the density gradient, relevant
                                                                                        to the extension of gradients into Bogor. About halfway to kotamadya
                                                                                        Bogor the gradient starts to m e again, although at a quite modest rate.
                                                                                            Population density in table 1 and figures 1 and 2 is the average
                                                                                        number of residents per hectare in each kecamatan. The estimating
                                                                                        equation for each year is:

                                                                                           In (pop. density) = C, +bodistance + b, distance squared           (1)
                                                                                           + b, Bogor dummy + b3distance to Bogor (for Bogor kecamatan)

                                                                                        The first three t e r m are standard in density analysis and apply to all
                                                                                        kcamatan. The last two apply only to kcamatan in Bogor, and represent
                                                                                        the fact that kotamadya Bogor (at the bottom of map 1)is a traditional
                                                                                        city with its own pull, or centre of gravity. In table 1, we also report
                                                                                        results for the density equation if the Bogor component and
                                                                                        observations are dropped. The general patterns are similar, with and
                                                                                        without Bogor. In equation (1).'distance' is the straight-line distance
                                                                                        from Monas (the traditional centre of Jakarta) measured in units of 3.4
                                                                                        km. The explanatory power of these simple regressions for 1980 and
                                                                                        1990 is very high. (The R2 for 1980 is 0.71; for 1990 it is 0.73). The
                                                                                        curves display the expected characteristics.
                                                                                            For 1980, density declines rapidly with distance from the centre of
                                                                                        Jakarta. Since access to the city centre is at a premium, population
                                                                                        generally clusters there, driving up land rents and density. As distance
                                                                                        from the centre increases, density and land rents decline, since there is
                                                                                        less demand for these locationally inferior sites. In practice, land price
                                                                                        or rent gradients have the same general shape as density gradients, and
                                                                                        those for Jakarta presented in Dowel1 and Leaf (1991) are no excephon.
                                                                                        76                    J. Vernon Henderson, Ari Kuncorn and Damhuri Nasution

                                                                                                        TABLE 1 Popuhtwn Drnsih~Gradient Regressionsa
                                                                                                                (stmtdard errors in parentheses)




Downloaded by [University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries] at 13:52 23 December 2014
                                                                                                                             In (Residential populationlhectare)
                                                                                                                             1980                           1990
                                                                                                                     (1)             (2)           (3)              (4)

                                                                                        Constant                     6.05-           6.27'         5.89'            5.94'
                                                                                                                    (.187)          (.210)        (.137)           (.145)

                                                                                        Distance                   -.M18'           -.7W          -.40P            -448'
                                                                                                                    (.063)          034)           (.046)           (.065)

                                                                                        Distance squared             .019*           ,036'         ,009'            ,015'
                                                                                                                                    (.009)        (.003)           (.061)

                                                                                        Dummy = 1 for                3.12'                         2.36.
                                                                                        kpcnmafan in Bogor          (.479)                        (.352)

                                                                                        Slope dummy distance        -448'                         -.%P
                                                                                        from Bogor (only for        (.075)                         (.055)
                                                                                        kecmnntnn in Bogor)

                                                                                        N                              78              60             78

                                                                                        Adj Rz                         .71             .73           .73

                                                                                        'Significant at 5%level.
                                                                                        aColumns (1) and (3) show estimates for equation (1) for the full urban area,
                                                                                        including the second centre Of gravity, Bogor. To show that inclusion of Bogor is
                                                                                        not driving results, columns (2) and (4) drop the 18 kccamatan m the Bogor
                                                                                        portion of Botabek.



                                                                                            Between 1980 and 1990 in Jabotabek there were major transport
                                                                                        improvements with the construction and extension of intra-city
                                                                                        highways, and there was massive population growth. In the absence of
                                                                                        population growth, improved trznsport facilities reduce the demand to
                                                                                        live at the city centre and the premium on location near it. Economic
                                                                                        theory tells us that population density gradients then rotate anti-
                                                                                        clockwise, becoming less steep-declining near the centre and rising
                                                                                        near the fringes. On the other hand, populabon growth, in the absence of
                                                                                        The Dynamics of Jabotabek Development                                         77

                                                                                        transport improvements, shifts up the demand for space and the density
                                                                                        gradient everywhere.
                                                                                            The 1990 and 1980 population density gradients in figure 1 reflect
                                                                                        both transport improvements and population growth. The former work




Downloaded by [University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries] at 13:52 23 December 2014
                                                                                        to rotate the gradient so it 1s less steep and density at the city centre is
                                                                                        lower. At 3.4 kilometres from Monas, population density declined at a
                                                                                        rate of 12% per kilometre in 1990, down from a rate of decline of 17%
                                                                                        per kilometre in 1980. (These figures account for both the quadratic
                                                                                        shape of figure 1 and the use of 3.4 km as the unit of distance in the
                                                                                        regression equation.) In the absence of population growth, with rotation
                                                                                        of the gradient due to transport investments, density at the city centre
                                                                                        would have declined from 42,000 per square kilometre in 1980 to about
                                                                                        20,000 in 1990.3But the 75% increase in the population of urbanised
                                                                                        Jakarta between 1980 and 1990 (World Bank 1993) caused the gradient
                                                                                        to shift up to its position in figure 1. While density did decline at the
                                                                                        centre, over most of the metro area there was strong growth in
                                                                                        population density (densificabon) further from the centre even within
                                                                                        DKI Jakarta. Note that in figure 2 the 1980 and 1990 Bogor portions of
                                                                                        the density gradient do not cross, reflecting Bogor's stagnant
                                                                                        development.
                                                                                            Jabotabeks density gradient remains somewhat steep. The rate of
                                                                                        population density decline per kilometre is in excess of, say, 11%: and
                                                                                        the semi-log regression has a strong quadratic (as opposed to standard
                                                                                        linear) shape. This feature reflects Jabotabeks continuing under-
                                                                                        investment in urban transportation, particularly the absence of any
                                                                                        mass transit system, poor management of vehicular traffic, and
                                                                                        uncoordinated and pwrly managed facilities that strongly discourage
                                                                                        non-vehicular traffic. Further investments would flatten Jabotabeks
                                                                                        density gradient, lowering population density near the centre to or
                                                                                        below, say, 25,000 residents per square kilometre, and raising density
                                                                                        on the fringes.
                                                                                            Future transport investments, along with rising per capita incomes,
                                                                                        will also precipitate dramatic changes in land use. Three aspects stand
                                                                                        out. Underlying the declines in density near the centre will be

                                                                                        %is 1s a 'back of the envelope' calculation, based on integrating population
                                                                                        density over the metropolitan area to obtam total papulahon, using the 1990
                                                                                        slope and calculating the constant tern m the density equation consistent with
                                                                                        the total 1980 population.
                                                                                        4Th1s or a flatter slope is typical of %o Paulo, Buenos Aires or New York City of
                                                                                        25 years ago. All evidence indicates further flatteningof density gradients for
                                                                                        these metro areas smce then
                                                                                        78                 J. Vernon Henderson, Ari Kunmm and Damhuri Nasution

                                                                                        conversion of many types of residential land to commercial use and, at
                                                                                        the high end, residential market construction of higher rise apartments in
                                                                                        particular neighbourhoods (e.&Jakarta Selatan and perhaps one day
                                                                                        the harbour). General declines in neighbowhood population densities




Downloaded by [University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries] at 13:52 23 December 2014
                                                                                        will reflect rising incomes and gentrification in kampungs and
                                                                                        traditional neighbourhoods, as upscaling consolidates land uses and
                                                                                        increases floor space of residences. Finally there will be densification of
                                                                                        land use further from the centre, as additional dwelling space is added
                                                                                        to housing units and compounds.
                                                                                            Density changes have direct and dramatic consequences for aspects
                                                                                        of urban development. High density accentuates negative spatial
                                                                                        externalities, as the noise and waste products of land users more
                                                                                        directly impinge on their neighbours. For example, Jabotabek residents
                                                                                        are almost universally served by water pumped from the ground, rather
                                                                                        than piped water connections, and by septic systems rather than sewer
                                                                                        lines. High population densities (for single family homes, under 500
                                                                                        square metres of land) imply septic systems will generally be in 'failure'
                                                                                        (Newby 1951), so that waste water will both rise to the surface,
                                                                                        imposing general health risks, and combine with ground water to pollute
                                                                                        pumped water. This is a well known problem with serious health
                                                                                        implications for Jakarta residents (World Bank 1953). What is less well
                                                                                        understood is how rapid population density changes can alter the
                                                                                        situation. As central city densities decline some of the contamination
                                                                                        problems will be alleviated. But more critically, as Jabotabek moves to
                                                                                        invest more in sewers or off-site servicing of domestic waste, the natural
                                                                                        sequence of neighbourhood redevelopment affectsthe optimal timing and
                                                                                        placement of such investments. There is no point in providing trunk
                                                                                        sewerage in old dense neighbourhoods today, if in a few years the
                                                                                        neighbourhoods will be redeveloped and desired sewer configurations
                                                                                        altered. Major investments in local roads, sewers and water mains
                                                                                        should be timed to follow the natural neighbourhood redevelopment
                                                                                        process.

                                                                                        Other Development Issues
                                                                                        Apart from these basic density-land use change questions, aspects of
                                                                                        developing land use in Jahotabek desewe comment.
                                                                                            Suburban Sprawl. First, in juxtaposition to the high population
                                                                                        density issues in DKI Jakarta, in the fringe areas of Botahek there are
                                                                                        serious problems of 'urban sprawl' (Struyk et al. 1990; Aksoro 1994).
                                                                                        Development occurs in 'pockets' of uncoordinated projects along major
                                                                                        highways. Each pocket, the project of one private developer. is not
                                                                                        linked to the next, so there are no networks of feeder and secondary
                                                                                        The Dynamics of JabotabekDevelopment                                   79

                                                                                        roads among developments. Pockets are not very deep, as developers rely
                                                                                        on immediate access to the highway, rather than deepening their own
                                                                                        developments through investment in feeder roads. The pattern of green
                                                                                        spaces between pockets and between the ribbons of development along




Downloaded by [University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries] at 13:52 23 December 2014
                                                                                        parallel highways is more a temporary accident than the result of long-
                                                                                        term planning. Developments are poorly serviced with water
                                                                                        connections, and sewage disposal still relies heavily on unregulated
                                                                                        septic systems.
                                                                                            There is no pro-active local land use planning in Indonesia, and
                                                                                        local rural officials in Botabek are not prepared for the impacts of the
                                                                                        rapid development that follows tollway or arterial road construction.
                                                                                        Preparation would involve: (1)forecasts of the local increase in demand
                                                                                        for land for residential, commercial and industrial use, in advance of or
                                                                                        in conjunction with tollway construction; (2) revision of local land use
                                                                                        plans to meet and allocate this forecast demand and to identify and plan
                                                                                        for consequent other infrastructure needs; and (3) constraint of
                                                                                        developer proposals to fit with these revised land use plans and
                                                                                        identified infrastructure needs. In practice, major land developers
                                                                                        approach unprepared kabupaten officials with development proposals,
                                                                                        location permits (Le. development rights) are issued, and unprepared
                                                                                        small current land owners are approached by the monopsonistic
                                                                                        developer of their area to sell, so land may be assembled for
                                                                                        development. Subsequently, so called national land use plans (held in a
                                                                                        division of Public Works) are passively revised to reflect construction
                                                                                        by these private developers, as sanctioned by the issue of location
                                                                                        permits by local officials.
                                                                                            Land Tenure and Land Use Development. There is a fairly clear
                                                                                        description of the complex system of land rights in Indonesia in chapter
                                                                                        5 of Struyk et d . (1990), and corroborating descriptions in Aksoro
                                                                                        (1994) and Dowel1 and Leaf (1991). In urban, particularly kampung,
                                                                                        areas, there are significant tracts of land for which those in possession
                                                                                        do not have a registered claim of ownership, nor sound customary title
                                                                                        evidenced by tax receipts and a letter from a local official. Squatters
                                                                                        may try to establish stronger claims by starting to pay taxes on their
                                                                                        land. Weaker claims, either without any sound customary title or with
                                                                                        less than strong claims to customary title, may be sufficient for informal
                                                                                        sales-transfers between two private parties that do not alter land use.
                                                                                        However these weaker claims represent a n extremely inhibiting force in
                                                                                        the dynxma of urban development.
                                                                                            As Jabotabek continues to grow, to change industrial composition, to
                                                                                        suburbanise industry, to decentralise and suburbanise population and
                                                                                        to experience growth in real incomes and housing demand, there will be
                                                                                        8(1                  J. Vernon Henderson, Ari Kuncoro and Damhuri Nasution

                                                                                        continuing dynamic pressures to alter and upgrade existing land uses
                                                                                        throughout much of the metro area. In large kampung neighbourhoods
                                                                                        where weak land right claims are widespread, altering land use (to, say,
                                                                                        commercial use or upscale housing) or upgrading land use (by




Downloaded by [University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries] at 13:52 23 December 2014
                                                                                        consolidation of holdings into larger plots and dwellings) is not easy. It
                                                                                        is difficult, for example, to assemble tracts of residential kampung land
                                                                                        for conversion to commercial or lower density residential use. Those in
                                                                                        possessory rights cannot sell their land (since they do not have title) and
                                                                                        can only exercise their rights and realise some value to their land by
                                                                                        continuing to reside on it, thus inhibiting changes in land use patterns.
                                                                                        According to Dowel1 and Leaf (1991), strong claim raise land prices by
                                                                                        45% over weak claims. Those with possessory rights and weak claims
                                                                                        will receive only a discounted price for their land if they 'sell (with the
                                                                                        land retaining the same residential use), and much less if the land is
                                                                                        taken for the public interest (e.g. for housing projects financed by the
                                                                                        government agency BTN) at compensation set by the government. The
                                                                                        insecurity of the claim also itself affects quality of land use: those with
                                                                                        more secure claims have a stronger incentive to invest in improving their
                                                                                        homes and neighbourhood, without fear of losing their investments
                                                                                        through poorly compensated takmgs or forced sales.
                                                                                            The straightforward way to solve the problem would be to devise a
                                                                                        mechanism to grant registered claim status to squatters of some long
                                                                                         tand ding.^ That would accelerate desired land conversion and
                                                                                        upgrading, because these residents would now receive full prices if they
                                                                                        sold their land for conversion and, otherwise, would have increased
                                                                                        incentives to improve their properties. Such a mechanism would promote
                                                                                        efficiency in the land market. But it has equity implications as well. It
                                                                                        would increase the wealth of kampung residents and assure them of a
                                                                                        greater share of the profits of redevelopment.
                                                                                            Socio-economic Stratification. At the neighbourhood level, land use in
                                                                                        Jabotabek is mixed: residential and commercial uses exist side by side
                                                                                        and small enclaves of high income residences are mixed in with low or
                                                                                        middle income housing, However, Jabotabek as a whole does exhibit an
                                                                                        expected general tendency to industrial clustering and to neighbourhood
                                                                                        segmentation by sociwxonomic status. Generally we expect residents of
                                                                                        the same socio-economicstatus to tend to group together, reflecting both
                                                                                        whom they want as neighbours and their common need for income-
                                                                                        appropriate neighbourhood shopping and service facilities.


                                                                                        T o discourage future (additional) squatting, new squatters should be r o u t i d y
                                                                                        evicted.
                                                                                        The Dynamics of JabotabekDevelopment                                         81

                                                                                         TABLE 2 Socio-economic Composlilon of the Kotamdydhbupatm ofjaboiabel?


                                                                                                                        Share of College         Share of Those with




Downloaded by [University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries] at 13:52 23 December 2014
                                                                                                                       EducatedBhare of           Less than Primary
                                                                                                                          Population               School/Share of
                                                                                                                                                     Population
                                                                                                                        1980         1990         1980        1990


                                                                                        Jakarta Selatan                  2.0          1.8          .80         .58
                                                                                        Jakarta Timur                    13           1.5          .63         .54
                                                                                        Jakarta Pusat                    1A           1.4          .69         .57
                                                                                        Jakarta Barat                    1.0          1.1          .83         .73
                                                                                        Jakarta Utara                    1.1           .87         .89         .75
                                                                                        Bogor                             .24          .43        1.5         1.4
                                                                                        Bekasi                            .33          .66        1.7         1.3
                                                                                        Tangerang                         .40          .63        1.4         1.3


                                                                                        aFigures are for population aged 10 years or older.




                                                                                            In Jabotabek in 1980 and 1990, Jakarta Selatan, Timur and Pusat
                                                                                        were home to college educated residents (table 2): their share in the
                                                                                        population of these regions relative to their share of the total
                                                                                        population ranges from 1.3 to 2.0, depending on the area and year. In
                                                                                        contrast, Jakarta Utara and the 'suburbs' in Botabek are home to less
                                                                                        educated residents.
                                                                                            The trends in spatial socic-economic status movement from 1980 to
                                                                                        1990 are also interesting. Jakarta Selatan is losing some of its relative
                                                                                        hold on the college educated, as these households suburbanise into high
                                                                                        income residential pockets over the Bogor border, a trend that is likely
                                                                                        to continue. But the low socio-economic status residents are also
                                                                                        suburbanising. Table 2 indicates that shares of the least educated people
                                                                                        relative to shares of total population fell everywhere. First, numerically
                                                                                        this is possible.6 Second, it occurs here with relative shares in DKI
                                                                                        Jakarta falling the most, as less educated people suburbanised.


                                                                                        6Consider three areas with shares in year 1 of less educated people and of
                                                                                        population of respectwely (.5, .4), (2,.l),and (.3, .5). ln year 2 these shares
                                                                                        82                   J. Vemon Henderson, Ari Kurmm and Damhuri Nasution

                                                                                            In non-American cities around the world, suburbanisation of
                                                                                        portions of both rich and p w r into different residential communities is
                                                                                        common. The flattening of density gradients applies to all income groups.
                                                                                        Inner cities retain enclaves of poorer traditional and ethnic




Downloaded by [University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries] at 13:52 23 December 2014
                                                                                        neighbourhoods, enclaves of traditional high income residents and
                                                                                        newer developments for younger professional people. Suburbanisation
                                                                                        of families, particularly in the child rearing ages, reflects a search for
                                                                                        cheaper land and housing and also indicates suburbanisation of jobs
                                                                                        and employment.All this appears to be happening in Jabotabek.
                                                                                            Suburbanisation involves extensive cross and circumferential
                                                                                        commuting. People from the same household commute from suburban
                                                                                        residential enclaves to different jobs in different locations: some in the
                                                                                        inner city, some nearby, some in other suburbs. In Jabotabek significant
                                                                                        commuting across knbupnten/kotamadya boundaries already occurs.
                                                                                        Even in DKI Jakarta in 1990, 27-43% of a k o f a m a d y a resident
                                                                                        workforce commuted outside their own kotnmndya. From nearby areas of
                                                                                        Botabek the percentages are much higher, with 5 M 2 % of the local
                                                                                        labour force commuting over their own kabupaten boundary into DKI
                                                                                        Jakarta (GO1 1993, annexes). With further transport improvements and
                                                                                        industrial and residential suburbanisation, this level of cross-
                                                                                        commuting should rise throughout Jabotabek.


                                                                                        INDUSTRIAL COMPOSITION A N D SPATIAL DISPERSION

                                                                                        Between 1980 and 1990, the composition of economic activity and
                                                                                        employment in Jabotabek altered dramatically. Significant changes are
                                                                                        given in table 3. The shares of manufacturing and financial and business
                                                                                        services in total Jabotabek employment both increased by about 70%.
                                                                                        the latter particularly in DKI Jakarta (see also table 4). This expansion
                                                                                        occurred at the expense of community, social and personal (including
                                                                                        government) services. The expansion in financial services is to be
                                                                                        expected, given Jakarta's role as a financial and headquarters centre.

                                                                                        Spatial Distribution of Manufacturing
                                                                                        The spatial distribution of employment in Jabotabek has also changed
                                                                                        significantly, with many implications for the dynamic development of
                                                                                        land use in Jabotabek. The most marked feature is the rapid



                                                                                        change to (6,51), (.3, .16) and (.I, .33). The year 1ratios of 1.25, 2, and .6 then
                                                                                        all fall to 1.16,1.88, and .3 respectively.
                                                                                        The Dynamics of Jabotabek Development                                        83

                                                                                                         TABLE 3 Industry Shmes of Total Employment’
                                                                                                                               (%J




Downloaded by [University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries] at 13:52 23 December 2014
                                                                                                                 Manufacturing        Financial and        Community,
                                                                                                                                        BUSineSS          Social and
                                                                                                                                        Services       Personal Services


                                                                                        Jabotabek

                                                                                        1980                            13                  3                  34

                                                                                        1990                            22                  5                  25

                                                                                        DKI Jakarta 1990                20                  7                  29


                                                                                        aFor all workers 10 years or older who worked the previous week.




                                                                                                           TABLE 4 Suburbanisation of Mmufadurinp


                                                                                                                        1986                1991               19894991


                                                                                        %of formal &or Jabotabek employment in Botabek
                                                                                                                     43                         56                  na

                                                                                        %of Jabotabek employment in small firms in Botabek
                                                                                                                      24                   na                       na

                                                                                        %of Jabotabek plant births in Botabek for 1989-91
                                                                                          Corporate sector               na                     na                  73
                                                                                          Unincorporated @ut formal) sector
                                                                                                                         na                     na                  32


                                                                                        sFigures relate to kecamtan for the 1990 urbanised portions of Jabotabek, using
                                                                                        1986 keumrntan boundaries.
                                                                                        Source: Revised DSP data files for the Annual Sunzey of Medum and Large
                                                                                        Scale Manufacturers. The number for small firms m Botabek is from the 1986
                                                                                        Economic Census.
                                                                                        84               J. Vernon Henderson, Ari Kuncom and Damhuri Nasution

                                                                                                            MAP 2 Employment m Jabotabek




Downloaded by [University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries] at 13:52 23 December 2014
                                                                                                                               Kecnmatan Employment
                                                                                                                                  in Manufacturing
                                                                                                                                 Over 8,000 rn 1986 and 1’31

                                                                                                                                 Under 8,000 m 1986 but over
                                                                                                                                                               II
                                                                                                                                 8,000 in 1991
                                                                                                                                 Over R,WO m 1986but under
                                                                                                                                 8,000 in 1991




                                                                                        Source: BPS Annual Survey of Medium and Large Scale Manufacturing as
                                                                                        wprocessed and updated by DSP.
                                                                                        The Dynamia of Jabutak?kDevelopment                                    85

                                                                                        suburbanisation of manufacturing with the extensions of the toll roads
                                                                                        into Bekasi and Tangerang in the late 1980s. The response within the
                                                                                        five-year period containing the toll road development is given in table 4.
                                                                                        Between 1986 and 1991 in the formal sector (medium and large s u e




Downloaded by [University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries] at 13:52 23 December 2014
                                                                                        establishments with over 20 employees), the share of Jabotabeks
                                                                                        manufacturing employment located in Botabek rose from 43 to 56%.
                                                                                        Within the formal sector, for 1989-1991, 73% of all plant births in
                                                                                        Jabotabek in the larger corporate sector (as opposed to unincorporated
                                                                                        sector) occurred in Botabek. This happened despite the EPZ (export
                                                                                        processing zone) status and protection enjoyed by the DKI Jakarta
                                                                                        kecamtun of Cakung and Cilincmg.7
                                                                                            The changing spatial distribution of manufacturing is pictured in
                                                                                        map 2. The stippled areas represent kecamatan where formal sector
                                                                                        manufacturing employment exceeded 8.000 in both 1986 and 1991.8AI1
                                                                                        these areas grew in employment between 1986 and 1991, by 40-120%
                                                                                        depending on the kecamatan. The heavy slashed areas represent
                                                                                        kecamatan whose formal manufacturing employment was less than 8,000
                                                                                        in 1986, but greater than 8,000 in 1991. Growth in all these kecamatan
                                                                                        was extraordinary: the slowest kecamatan in the group had a 210%
                                                                                        increase in manufacturing employment. But for the most eastern and
                                                                                        western kecamatan. one grew fourteen-fold to 93,000 and three others
                                                                                        grew from zero employment in 1986 to 13,000, 16,000 and 22,000 in
                                                                                        1991. Finally, the areas marked by broken slashes represent DKI
                                                                                        kecamatan nearer the centre, where manufacturing employment exceeded
                                                                                        8,000 in 1986 but fell below 8,000 by 1991, generally with very large
                                                                                        declines.
                                                                                            The suburbanisation of industry in rapid response to tollway
                                                                                        development reflects the ‘pen-up demand’ of industial establishments to
                                                                                        escape the high costs of Land and labour in DKI Jakarta, and to obtain
                                                                                        large plots of land for development. Suburbanising in order to lower
                                                                                        production costs helps manufacturers remain competitive in world
                                                                                        markets. Since 1991, industrial development has spread rapidly further
                                                                                        east and west into the kabupaten of Serang and Karawang beyond
                                                                                        Tangerang and Bekasi, as is apparent from the August 1994 land use
                                                                                        documents deposited in the Ministry of Public Works. This very rapid
                                                                                        decentralisation along transport corridors suggests that, with further
                                                                                        transport and communication development throughout Java, industry
                                                                                                                      ~




                                                                                        7At the eastern end of Jakarta Timur and Jakarta Utara respectively.
                                                                                        *The cutoff figure of 8,000 1s used because there are almost no areas with
                                                                                        employment between 6,000 and 8.000.
                                                                                        a6                 J. Vernon Henderson, An Kuncoro and Damhun Nasution

                                                                                        could decentralise into interior medium and smaller cities beyond the
                                                                                        Jabotabek area. Average wage costs for workers of similar skill are
                                                                                        typically 1M)-150% higher in the largest than in the smallest metro
                                                                                        areas, simply reflecting cost-of-living differentials (Henderson 1991).




Downloaded by [University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries] at 13:52 23 December 2014
                                                                                        Even with decentralisation into Botabek, average labour costs in urban
                                                                                        West Java remain much higher than in cities in other parts of Java, with
                                                                                        the differential growing? Within Jabotabek itself there is a 25% wage
                                                                                        differential between formal sector manufacturing in Jakarta and in
                                                                                        Botabek. For standardised manufacturing processes, this remains a
                                                                                        powerful incentive to decentralise, following enabling conditions such
                                                                                        as appropriate infrastructure investments (transport and
                                                                                        communications) and decentralisation of financing.

                                                                                        Multi-Centred Development
                                                                                        For Jabotabek this rapid decentralisation of industly has changed
                                                                                        Jakarta from a metropolitan area dominated by one 'business district'
                                                                                        for manufacturing (Jakarta Utara plus portions of Jakarta Pusat) to a
                                                                                        distinctly multi-centred metro area. Statistically, for example, a formal
                                                                                        sector manufacturing employment density gradient (following the
                                                                                        figure 1 methodology, substituting employment counts for resident
                                                                                        counts) for 1986 has a distinct monocentric shape, given in columns (1)
                                                                                        and (3) of table 5. In table 5, density is the average number of
                                                                                        manufacturing workers per hectare in a kecamatan. The density gradient
                                                                                        has the same shape as in equation (l),except that we have dropped the
                                                                                        quadratic term. This equation for 1986 has significant coefficients and
                                                                                        an R2 of 0.38. Graphically it has the same shape for 1986 as the
                                                                                        population density gradients in figure 1. However, by 1991 employment
                                                                                        density has changed so that the slope of the gradient is much flatter and
                                                                                        central employment per hectare is halved. Moreover, the 1991
                                                                                        coefficients are insignificant and the R2for the 1991 equation is only
                                                                                        0.08, Thus there is no significant correlation between distance from the
                                                                                        centre and employment density in 1991, which indicates the loss of
                                                                                        monocentricity.The loss occurs regardless of specification.For example,
                                                                                        dropping Bogor observations and variables yields almost identical
                                                                                        results, as shown in columns (2) and (4).
                                                                                            These statements concerning the loss of monocentricity for
                                                                                        manufacturing employment also apply to individual industries. We



                                                                                        %ource: Unpublished graphs of wage increases by occupation for the last bur
                                                                                        years, prepared by the Development SCudies Project (DSP).
                                                                                        The Dynamics of JabotabekDevelopment                                          €7

                                                                                                              TABLE 5 Employment Density Gmdienf’
                                                                                                                 (standard m o n m pnrmtheses)




Downloaded by [University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries] at 13:52 23 December 2014
                                                                                                                           Ln (Manufacturingemployment/hectare)
                                                                                                                                1986                1991
                                                                                                                             (1)         (2)          (3)       (4)

                                                                                        Constant                             6.26‘       6.45         5.53’       5.55
                                                                                                                            (.386)      (266)        (.463)     (.510)

                                                                                        Distance (to Monas)                 -.350*     -.4w          493        -.198
                                                                                                                             (.086)    (.087)        (.101)     (.116)

                                                                                        Dummy: kotamadya Bogor               3.07‘                     1.55
                                                                                                                            (1.21)                   (1.46)

                                                                                        Slop dummy: distance to Bogor       -.665*                      .393
                                                                                                                             (.176)                   (.230)

                                                                                        Adj R2                                ,382       3 0           ,078       .032

                                                                                        N                                       61         43            78        M)


                                                                                        “Significantat 5%level.
                                                                                        aEzc.%matandefinihons change from 1986 to 1990/91, with the splittingof some
                                                                                        1986 kecnmatan into two or three. Columns (2) and (4) drop kecnrnatan in Bngnr.



                                                                                        examine the three main industries-textiles and apparel (including
                                                                                        footwear), chemicals (including petrochemicals), and machinery
                                                                                        (including electrical machinery and transport equipment), which
                                                                                        account for respectively 41%,17%and 19%of Jabotabek manufacturing
                                                                                        employment (the next most important sector, fuud processing, accounts
                                                                                        for 5%).In table 6, we give the employment density gradients for these
                                                                                        three industries for 1986 and 1991. As for overall manufacturing, each
                                                                                        industry displays significant monocentricity in 1986 and none in 1991.
                                                                                        Slope coefficients go to zero in 1991 for the displayed results and also
                                                                                        for results estimated omitting Bogor coefficients and observations.
                                                                                            This loss of monocentricity does not imply simple spatial dispersion
                                                                                        of industry per se. Rather it reflects development of new manufacturing
                                                                                        88                   J. Vernon Hendemn, An Kunoarc and Damhuri Nasution

                                                                                                   TABLE 6 Individual Industry Employment Density Grndients
                                                                                                                fstandmd mors in parmtheses)




Downloaded by [University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries] at 13:52 23 December 2014
                                                                                                                   1986                              1991
                                                                                                      Textiles Chemicals Machinery     Textilff Chemicals Machinery
                                                                                                       and                               and
                                                                                                      Apparel                          Apparel


                                                                                        constant           4.3'    4.T         4.w         4.4*     2.8'       5.2'
                                                                                                          646)     (.e)      (.45)        (.48)    (1.5)      (.70)
                                                                                        Distance         -.25*    -.37*      -.25'       -.197      -.M        -.07
                                                                                                          (.IO)    (.lo)     (.lo)      (.101)     (.lo)      (.l5)
                                                                                        Bogordummy          1.9     3.2'        1.4        1.2      -.05       -2.8
                                                                                                         (1.5)     (1.4)     (1.4)       (1.5)     (1.5)      (2.2)
                                                                                        Slope dummy for Bogor:
                                                                                          distance to Bogor
                                                                                                       -.a*       -56'       -.35        -.27      4 5          .35
                                                                                                        (.21)      (.20)     (.21)       (.24)     (23)       (.34)
                                                                                        Adj R2            .16       .26        20          .06       .la       .a7
                                                                                        N                 61         61         61         78         78        78


                                                                                        Tignihcant at 5% level.



                                                                                        centres outside of the north Jakarta area. In fact the degree of spatial
                                                                                        concentration of industry in Jabotabek increases from 1986 and 1991. To
                                                                                        see this we construct a measure of concentration-the Hirschman-
                                                                                        Herfindahl index (HIHI).The "Ifor each industry is the sum of squares
                                                                                        of each kecamatan's share of total Jabotabek employment, calculated for
                                                                                        1986 and 1991 for the 61 kecamatan defined on a 1986 basis (so we can
                                                                                        compare 1986 and 1991 indices). If an industry has employment
                                                                                        uniformly distributed over the 61 kecamatan its HHI would be ,016
                                                                                        (1/61), whereas if employment is concentrated all in one kecamatan the
                                                                                        industry's HHI has the value 1.More generally, increases in HHI reflect
                                                                                        increased spatial concentration of industry.
                                                                                            "Is   for all manufachxing and for the three major industries are
                                                                                        given in table 7. In all cases the HHI increases, although most modestly
                                                                                        The Dynamics of Jabotabek Development                                          89

                                                                                        for machinery, the already most concentrated industry. Thus despite the
                                                                                        development of several new manufacturing clusters m Jabotabek, spatial
                                                                                        concentration increases between 1986 and 1991. Concentration levels
                                                                                        are least for textiles and apparel.




Downloaded by [University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries] at 13:52 23 December 2014
                                                                                            Apart from the traditional Bogor kotomadyn, Jabotabek shows four
                                                                                        areas of industrial activity: Jakarta Utara, Bekasi and its border with
                                                                                        DKI, Tangerang and its border with DKI, and Bogor knbifpnten along the
                                                                                        marked toll road and adjacent (to the west) unmarked highway (map 2).
                                                                                        However this notion of four centres is a little misleading for two
                                                                                        reasons. First, the Bogor strip has heavy apparel and textile




                                                                                                  TABLE 7 Geographic Concentrotionfor Manufacturing (“I)


                                                                                                             All          Textiles       Chemicals         Machinery
                                                                                                      Manufacturing        and
                                                                                                                          Apparel


                                                                                        1986               .OS34            ,0467           ,0789            0925

                                                                                        1991               4585             ,0567           ,0863           ,0929




                                                                                        concentrations, while the other areas also have heavy representations
                                                                                        of machinery, transport equipment, and chemicals. Second, the other
                                                                                        three centres really form a band running east-west through Jakarta
                                                                                        Utara and extending along the tollways and unmarked highways. Given
                                                                                        positive externalities m production through information spillovers, and
                                                                                        given the need to mininuse transport costs among establlslunents engaged
                                                                                        in different stages of processing of the same final product, this spatial
                                                                                        band of contiguous activity among these centres is not unexpected.

                                                                                        Informal Sector Development
                                                                                        This picture of decentralising industry is incomplete in one critical
                                                                                        aspect. It relates only to medium and large-scale formal sector industry.
                                                                                        90                 J. Vernon Henderson, Ari Kunmm and Damhuri Nasution

                                                                                        In 1990, in DKI Jakarta for example, we estimate that about 40% of
                                                                                        manufacturing employment was in the informal sector,lo i.e. in
                                                                                        establishments with less than 20 employees (small establishments of 5
                                                                                        20 employees and 'cottage industries' of less than 5 employees). Small




Downloaded by [University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries] at 13:52 23 December 2014
                                                                                        sector employment is much less suburbanised. In 1986 only 24%of small
                                                                                        establishment employment was in Botabek, compared with 43% for the
                                                                                        formal sector (table 4). Even in the formal sector, the larger, more mobile
                                                                                        corporate establishments have a greater tendency to suburbanise than
                                                                                        unincorporated establishments. In 1989-91, 73% of new plant births in
                                                                                        the Jabotabek corporate sector were in Botabek, compared with 32% for
                                                                                        the unincorporated (but formal) sector (table 4).
                                                                                            These numbers suggest that Jakarta Utara remains a key industrial
                                                                                        centre, bolstered by the extension of the EPZ (export processing zone)
                                                                                        from Cakung into Cilinang. Its importance extends beyond its 25% share
                                                                                        of metro area formal sector manufacturing employment, because it
                                                                                        includes heavy concentrations of small-scale and cottage industry This
                                                                                        smaller-scale industry can be important for two reasons. First, evidence
                                                                                        from Rio de Janeiro and Calcutta (Mukherjee 1990; Sarkar and
                                                                                        Mukhejee 1987) suggests that the small-scale sector has strong links to
                                                                                        the corporate sector, supplying it with labour-intensive parts and
                                                                                        components and filling orders for special feature or design components
                                                                                        and machinery. The small-scale sector also plays a key role in
                                                                                        assembling scrap and reprocessing it, in repairs, and in rebuilding of
                                                                                        used parts and components. Second, according to evidence from Seoul
                                                                                        (Lee 1989) and SBo Paulo (Hamer 1983),a different portion of the small-
                                                                                        scale sector can play an incubator role. Small plants engage in
                                                                                        speculative or experimental production, infusing manufacturing with
                                                                                        new ideas and new adaptations of existing technology, and spurring
                                                                                        competition with the corporate sector. If successful, these small plants
                                                                                        grow into larger plants or are absorbed into the corporate sector. In
                                                                                        both roles, the small-scale sector contributes significantly to overall
                                                                                        manufacturing productivity growth, beyond simple measures of small-
                                                                                        scale sector value added.
                                                                                            These considerations raise an important issue for the development of
                                                                                        Jakarta Utara. Not only is large-scale manufacturing employment still



                                                                                        'OThis assessment is made by comparing 1990 employment totals for
                                                                                        manufacturing from the Population Census and the Survey of Large and
                                                                                        Medium Size ManufacturingEstabhshments. The 40% informal sector figure is
                                                                                        comparable to figures from the 1986 Economic Census covering all industrial
                                                                                        activih-.
                                                                                        The Dynamics of JabolabekDevelopment                                   91

                                                                                        growing, but there remains a large concentration of small-scale
                                                                                        industrial employment there. The DKI government has plans for a large
                                                                                        mixed use waterfront development project to he built on landfill
                                                                                        extending into the current harbour, as part of a general modernisation




Downloaded by [University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries] at 13:52 23 December 2014
                                                                                        and gentrification of Jakarta Utara. Any planned waterfront
                                                                                        development feeding into the overall development of Jakarta Utara
                                                                                        should recognise the following:

                                                                                            -   Jakarta Utara is a growing manufacturing centre.
                                                                                                The small-scale sector in Jakarta Utara plays a critical role in
                                                                                                manufacturing produchvity and productivity growth, even if it
                                                                                                appears not to be 'modern'. Attempts to eliminate small-scale
                                                                                                activity will hurt formal sector productivity and competitiveness
                                                                                                in world markets.
                                                                                                Elimination of small-scale sector activity will create a spatial
                                                                                                mismatch for kampung residents with limited resources for
                                                                                                commuting between central area residential locations and
                                                                                                suburban jobs for low skill workers. That could certainly foster
                                                                                                kampung unemployment and dissatisfaction.

                                                                                        Location of Financial and Business Services
                                                                                        For non-manufacturing industries, spatial development is harder to
                                                                                        track. The only useful source is the Economic Census held every 10
                                                                                        years (the last being 1986); its data are nut readily available and remain
                                                                                        largely unanalysed. The Population Census tells us the industry of
                                                                                        residents according to where they live, not where they work, giving only
                                                                                        a rough picture of industrial location.
                                                                                            Table 8 presents figures for employment in finance and business
                                                                                        services based on the 1980 and 1990 Population Census. These figures
                                                                                        indicate the continuing development of the 'Golden Triangle' of upscale
                                                                                        business and financial services in Jakarta Pusat and running south to
                                                                                        Block M in Jakarta Selatan. Along with these services is a high
                                                                                        representation in Jakarta Selatan of social, community and personal
                                                                                        services (35% of employment, compared with a Jabotabek share of 25%)
                                                                                        and a high representation in Jakarta Pusat of retail, hotel and
                                                                                        restaurant services (34% of employment versus 24% for Jabotabek).As
                                                                                        in other metro areas around the world, upscale portions of financial,
                                                                                        business, government and retail services are centralised.
                                                                                        92                  J. Vernon Henderson, Ari Kuncoro and Damhuri Nasution

                                                                                             TABLE 8 Share ofEmploymmt 0fResidmts in Finance and Businers S m ' c s
                                                                                                                 h, Kotamadyakbupatena
                                                                                                                              (%)




Downloaded by [University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries] at 13:52 23 December 2014
                                                                                                                                1980                          1990

                                                                                        JakartaSelatan                           4.8                          8.4
                                                                                        JakartaTimur                             3.0                          6.6
                                                                                        Jakarta Pusat                            4.4                          9.7
                                                                                        Jakarta Barat                            3.5                          6.5
                                                                                        Jakarta Utara                            2.0                          5.9
                                                                                        Bogor                                    1.0                          1.2
                                                                                        Bekasi                                   1.2                          2.8
                                                                                        Tangerang                                2.0                          3.0


                                                                                        aFor all workers 10 years or older who worked in the previous week.



                                                                                        CONCLUSIONS

                                                                                        Jabotabek today has many attractive features. It is experiencing high
                                                                                        levels of private investment in industrial and residential land uses; it
                                                                                        has developed into a multi-centred metro area that is reducing its very
                                                                                        high population densities near the city centre; it has green space spread
                                                                                        throughout the metro area; it has the foundations for a strong intra-
                                                                                        metro arterial highway system, and it radiates a vibrancy and a sense of
                                                                                        a reasonable quality of life for many of its residents. As a large, rapidly
                                                                                        growing metro area, however, it faces many challenges and changes.

                                                                                                 With further transport infrastructwe investments in Jabotabek
                                                                                                 and further per capita income growth, there will be a continuing
                                                                                                 decline in population density nearer the core city, and
                                                                                                 densification and suburbanisation further out. The consequent
                                                                                                 rapid changes in land use patterns should influence the timing of
                                                                                                 other infrastructure investments (e.g. sewerage) in redeveloping
                                                                                                 areas of Jakarta.
                                                                                        The Dynamics of Jabotakk Development                                      93

                                                                                               In this context of rapidly changing land use in Jabotabek, there is
                                                                                               very little pro-active land use planning. Not only is there little
                                                                                               planning to ensure reasonably efficient allocations of green
                                                                                               space and configurations of industrial (obnoxious) and




Downloaded by [University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries] at 13:52 23 December 2014
                                                                                               residential (non-obnoxious) land users, but developments are
                                                                                               characterised by urban sprawl and poor infrastructure
                                                                                               investments. Local officials permit ribbon (as opposed to deep-
                                                                                               pocket) development, along highways, of projects with
                                                                                               inadequate sewerage, local roads and water. Within Jakarta,
                                                                                               efficient land redevelopment, especially in and around
                                                                                               traditional kampungs, is hindered by a lack of clear title or land
                                                                                               claim rights in lower income traditmnal areas. A simple solution
                                                                                               would be to grant title to long-term residents with strong
                                                                                               possessory rights.
                                                                                               Industry is decentralising at an incredibly rapid rate in response
                                                                                               to toll road construction. This reflects 'pent-up' demand to escape
                                                                                               north-central Jakarta's high wage and land rent costs. Jabotabek
                                                                                               has become a multi-centred metro area, rather than one dominated
                                                                                               by central city employment, at least for manufacturing. This
                                                                                               suburbanisation of industry takes the form of development of
                                                                                               new centres or clusters of manufacturing activity, rather than
                                                                                               simple dispersion. In fact spatial concentration of industry
                                                                                               increased (modestly) between 1986 and 1991. The future
                                                                                               promises more suburbanisation of industry and, potentially,
                                                                                               decentralisation of manufacturing into smaller and medium sized
                                                                                               cities in other parts of Java.
                                                                                               Despite suburbanisation, Jakarta Utara remains a major
                                                                                               corporate manufacturing centre, supported by a large small-scale
                                                                                               manufacturing sector. Future waterfront developments should
                                                                                               reccgnise the important role of small-scale manufactwing in that
                                                                                               area of the city.


                                                                                        REFERENCES
                                                                                        Aksoro, L.W. (1994).The Effects of the Location Permit on Urban Land Markets,
                                                                                            Unpublished Masters thesis, MIT, Cambridge MA.
                                                                                        Dowell, D., and M. Leaf (1991). 'me Price of Land for Housing in Jakarta',
                                                                                            Urban Studies 28, pp. 707-22.
                                                                                        GO1 (1993), labotabek Metropolitan Development Plan Review, Final Report and
                                                                                            Technical Reports #5,6,8 and 10, Mirustry of Public Works, Jakarta.
                                                                                        94                   J. Vernon Henderson, A n Kuncom and Damhuri Nasution

                                                                                        Hamer, A. (19831, 'Decentralised Urban Development and Industrial Location
                                                                                             Behavior m S o Paulo BraziY, World Bank, Washngton E€ (mimea).
                                                                                        Henderson, J.V. (19911, Urban Deaelopment: Theory, Fact and Illusion, Oxford
                                                                                             University Press, New York IVY.




Downloaded by [University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries] at 13:52 23 December 2014
                                                                                        Henderson, 1 V., and A. Kuncoro (1996). 'Industrial Centralization in
                                                                                             Indonesia, World Bank Economic Reuieu, (forthcoming).
                                                                                        Ingram, G., and A. Carol1 (1981), 'The Spatial Structure of Latin American
                                                                                             Cihes', Journal o j Urban Economics 9, pp. 257-74.
                                                                                        Lee, K.S. (19811, The Location oflobs in a Deuelopzng Mehopolis, Oxford University
                                                                                             Press, New York NY.
                                                                                        Mukheqee, Robin (1990), 'Conditions of Labor in the Small Scale and
                                                                                             Unorganized Sectors in Calcutta and Its Neighborhood, ILO, Geneva,
                                                                                             WEF 2-43/WP.36.
                                                                                        Newby, P.E. (1991), Predicting Sephc System Failures, Unpublished Masters
                                                                                             thesis, Brown University, Providence FX
                                                                                        Sarker, N , and R. hlukheqee (1987), 'Dependence of the Small-Scale
                                                                                             Manufacturing Enterprise on the Organized Sector--Some Evidence',
                                                                                             Artha Viinlinli 29 (3), pp. 28696.
                                                                                        Struyk, R , M. Hoffman and H. Katsura (1990), The Market for Shelter in
                                                                                             Indonesian Gtws, Urban Institute Press, Washington DC.
                                                                                        World Bank (1993). 'Indonesia. Urban Infrastructure Services', Report No.
                                                                                             12154-IND, Washngton DC.
                                                                                        The Dynamics of Jabotabek Development                                      95

                                                                                        APPENDIX A URBANISED KECAMATAN OF
                                                                                        JABOTABEK IN 1990/9l1'

                                                                                        42 kecamatan of DKI Jakarta (excludes Kepulauan Seribu)




Downloaded by [University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries] at 13:52 23 December 2014
                                                                                        3 kecamntan of kotip Depok"
                                                                                        5 kcamatan of kotip Tangerang
                                                                                        4 kecamntan of kofip Bekasi
                                                                                        5 kecamatan of kotamadya Bogor
                                                                                        plus
                                                                                        for Bogor:          Cimanggis
                                                                                                            Cibinong
                                                                                                            Kedunghalang
                                                                                                            Semplak
                                                                                                            Bojong Gede
                                                                                                            Sawangan
                                                                                                            Ciampea
                                                                                                            Ciomas
                                                                                                            Cijeruk
                                                                                                            Ciawi

                                                                                        for Tangerang:      SerPong
                                                                                                            Ciputat
                                                                                                            Pondok Arm
                                                                                                            Cmg
                                                                                                            Teluknaga

                                                                                        for Bekasi:         Pondokgede
                                                                                                            Cikarang
                                                                                                            Cibitung
                                                                                                            Tambun




                                                                                        "Some of these have since been divided into two, andfor their boundaries
                                                                                        redrawn.
                                                                                        '*Kotip = kotn administratip (lit. administrative city)-= recognised urban unit
                                                                                        without the independence of a kotamadya
