[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: journal/M11-geertman-stillwell-2004-planning-support-systems-an-inventory-of-current-practice-10.1016-S0198-9715-03-00024-3.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Title:           doi:10.1016/S0198-9715(03)00024-3
Creator:         Elsevier
Producer:        Acrobat Distiller 4.05 for Windows
CreationDate:    Wed Mar 24 21:26:26 2004 WIB
ModDate:         Wed Mar 24 20:58:02 2004 WIB
Custom Metadata: no
Metadata Stream: no
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            none
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           20
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       468 x 680 pts
Page rot:        0
File size:       938637 bytes
Optimized:       no
PDF version:     1.7
[Extracted Text]
                                 Computers, Environment and Urban Systems
                                             28 (2004) 291–310
                                                               www.elsevier.com/locate/compenvurbsys




       Planning support systems: an inventory of
                   current practice
                             Stan Geertmana,*, John Stillwellb
           a
               Faculty of Geographical Sciences, URU/Nexpri, Utrecht University, Heidelberglaan 2,
                                        3508 TC Utrecht, The Netherlands
                          b
                           School of Geography, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK

                               Received 12 July 2002; accepted 10 February 2003



Abstract
   Planning support systems are a subset of computer-based geo-information instruments,
each of which incorporates a unique suite of components that planners can utilise to explore
and manage their particular activities. The components may include data sets, computer
algorithms and display facilities, as well as more abstract theoretical constructs, knowledge
and modelling capabilities. PSS are used to support the planning process by communicating
information as well as by generating solutions. An Internet-based inventory was established in
2000–2001 to identify the existence and use of PSS in planning practice worldwide. In this
paper we take a closer look at the instruments recorded in the inventory and some of their
main characteristics. Some recommendations are made for the development and application
of PSS in the future.
# 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Planning Support Systems (PSS); Planning; Geo-information technology




1. Introduction

  A plethora of methods and tools have been used by professional planners over
many years to support their various planning activities in diﬀerent contexts. Never-
theless, it can be argued that planning practitioners have never fully embraced the
diversity of methods, techniques and models developed in the research laboratory to
analyse spatial problems, evaluate alternative options or project future scenarios.
Most geo-information tools do not readily ﬁt the changing needs of the planning


  * Corresponding author.

0198-9715/03/$ - see front matter # 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/S0198-9715(03)00024-3
292      S. Geertman, J. Stillwell / Comput., Environ. and Urban Systems 28 (2004) 291–310


profession; they are far too generic, complex, inﬂexible, incompatible with most
planning tasks, oriented towards technology rather than problems, and too focused
on strict rationality, as documented by number of commentators including Couclelis
(1989), Ottens (1990), Scholten and Stillwell (1990), Klosterman (1994), Worrall
(1994), Bishop (1998), Nedovic-Budic (1998) and Geertman (1999).
  Partly as a consequence of this mismatch between the demands of practitioners
and the supply of methods and techniques, a new generation of novel or redeveloped
tools to facilitate ‘new’ planning practice has materialised under a generic term-
planning support systems (PSS). These systems include instruments relating to geo-
information technology that have been primarily developed to support diﬀerent
aspects of the planning process, including problem diagnosis, data collection, mining
and extraction, spatial and temporal analysis, data modelling, visualisation and
display, scenario-building and projection, plan formulation and evaluation, report
preparation, enhanced participation and collaborative decision-making. In the case
of the latter—the development of support for participatory planning processes—
a variety of new instruments has emerged ranging from electronic conference
board rooms (group decision support systems) (Laurini, 1998) and GIS-supported
collaborative decision-making tools (Nyerges & Jankowski 1997) to Web-based
mediation systems for co-operative spatial planning (Gordon, Karacapilidis, Voss,
& Zauke, 1997; Shiﬀer, 1992) and support tools for diﬀerent planning tasks
(Geertman, 2002a; Hopkins, 1998, 1999; Kammeier, 1999; Klosterman, 1999b;
Singh, 1999).
  Despite these developments, there remains a general lack of knowledge of and
insight into the development, adoption and implementation of PSS in diﬀerent
planning contexts. The state-of-the-art in terms of the adoption of PSS and their real
contribution in practise has remained uncertain. Therefore, in 2000 we decided to
construct an inventory of PSS. This article provides insights into some of the
important issues relating to the PSS contained in the inventory. It begins in Section
2 with the question of deﬁnition: what makes a PSS diﬀerent from other geo-
technology based systems like a geographical information system (GIS) and a spatial
decision support system (SDSS)? The inventory, its context, aims and creation are
discussed in Section 3. Thereafter, in Section 4, selected examples from the inventory
are used to illustrate the range of applications that have been developed. Finally,
Section 5 contains a number of recommendations.


2. Deﬁning PSS

  As indicated already, PSS consist of a wide diversity of geo-information tools that
are dedicated to support public or private planning processes (or parts thereof) at
any particular spatial scale and within a speciﬁc planning context. PSS have much in
common with two other well-known systems: GIS and SDSS. So what makes a PSS
diﬀerent from a GIS or a SDSS?
  PSS are generally regarded as systems in which technologies dedicated to the
planning profession are brought together. Harris and Batty (1993) associated the
         S. Geertman, J. Stillwell / Comput., Environ. and Urban Systems 28 (2004) 291–310   293


concept of PSS with combining a range of computer-based methods and models into
an integrated system that is used to support a particular planning function. More
precisely, in their opinion, a single PSS forms the framework in which three sets of
components are combined: the speciﬁcation of the planning tasks and problems at
hand, including the assembly of data; the system models and methods that inform
the planning process through analysis, prediction and prescription; and the trans-
formation of basic data into information which in turn provides the driving force for
modelling and design (through a cyclic process). In a similar vein, Klosterman (1997,
1999a) and Brail and Klosterman (2001) more recently, have described PSS as
information technologies that are used speciﬁcally by planners to undertake their
unique professional responsibilities. They suggest that PSS have matured into fra-
meworks of integrated systems of information and software that synthesise the three
components of traditional DSS—information, models, and visualization—and deliver
them into the public realm.
  In contrast, GIS can be regarded as general-purpose systems, comprising tools for
handling geo-referenced data, and applicable for a wide diversity of tasks and pro-
blems in various settings. There are many generic GIS on the commercial market
and systems such as MapInfo Professional, IDRISI or ArcGIS have now become
commonplace on the desktop. On many occasions, a proprietary GIS will form part
of a PSS, given the standard sets of functional capabilities that the former very
usefully provides. SDSS, on the other hand, can be regarded as systems designed
speciﬁcally to support a decision research process for complex spatial problems.
They provide frameworks for integrating database management systems with ana-
lytical models, graphical display and tabular reporting capabilities, and with the
expert knowledge of decision-makers (Densham, 1991). Although SDSS have much
in common with PSS, PSS generally have to pay particular attention to long-range
problems and strategic issues and may even be designed explicitly to facilitate group
interaction and discussion. SDSS, on the other hand, are generally designed to sup-
port shorter-term policy-making by isolated individuals or by business organizations
(Clarke 1990, chap. 15). Moreover, their prime dedication is towards supporting
executive decision-making rather than professional planning activities.
  In our view, the categories of PSS, GIS and SDSS are by no means mutually
exclusive and have much in common, but each does possess certain distinguishing
characteristics as indicated previously. PSS speciﬁcally support the whole of or some
part of a unique professional planning task. They aid the planning process by pro-
viding integrated environments usually based on multiple technologies and a com-
mon interface. In some cases, the integrated environment is no more than a loosely
coupled collection of computer-based tools. However, it is not so much the tech-
nology, with its capabilities and restrictions, that dictates the support function per-
formed by the PSS, but the speciﬁc needs of the planning context in which the PSS is
designed to operate. As a consequence, emphasis is focused on the ﬁrst S (for sup-
port) in the PSS acronym in conjunction with the P, rather than on the second S (for
systems), as has been the case in practice so often before. In summary, PSS distin-
guish themselves from GIS and SDSS by virtue of the fact that they are dedicated
speciﬁcally to activities associated with planning in practice.
294      S. Geertman, J. Stillwell / Comput., Environ. and Urban Systems 28 (2004) 291–310


3. A PSS inventory

   Stillwell, Geertman, and Openshaw (1999a) provide an assessment of planning
practice at the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst century from which it can be concluded
that the adoption of geo-information tools is far from widespread and from being
eﬀectively integrated into the planning process. Planners and designers remain at
best distrustful, and at worst downright antagonistic, toward computer-based mod-
els (Harris, 1998, 1999). From these and other studies (e.g. Brail & Klosterman,
2001), it can be concluded no comprehensive picture of the extent of the develop-
ment of PSS has yet been constructed and no assessment of the success of their
adoption has been produced. As a result, diﬀerent groups of researchers and devel-
opers may well be undertaking a substantial amount of work that duplicates or
overlaps with work undertaken elsewhere. At the same time, the planning commu-
nity as a whole has little idea of where to look when searching in the academic or
planning literature for good examples of the use of PSS in practice, details of new
instruments or advice and support for PSS. This is problematic for the potential
consumers (planners) at a time when there is an increasing need for geo-information
technology support. Moreover, the developers of PSS have to prove the worth of
their products in real-world planning situations.
   In view of these circumstances, a review of the ﬁeld of PSS has been undertaken to
identify innovative examples of geo-information technology-related applications and
‘best practice’ that ﬁts into the PSS deﬁnition given above. A Web-based inventory
of PSS was established in order to collect details of PSS implemented and opera-
tional in planning practice including those available as oﬀ-the-shelf commercial
products and also including prototypes under development. Entries to the inventory
(which can be found at http://www.nexpri.nl) were made between June 2000 and
June 2001 and about 50 contributions were received from over 20 countries including
the Netherlands, the UK, the USA, Italy, Columbia, Australia, New Zealand, Rus-
sia, South Africa, Malaysia, Sweden, Finland, the Czech Republic and Hong Kong.
   Following careful scrutiny of the inventory entries, a number of systems from
various countries covering a wide range of application areas of strategic support,
land-use and infrastructure planning and environmental management, were selected
for inclusion in more detailed form as chapters of a book (Geertman & Stillwell,
2003). In the next section, some of the PSS inventory will be described in summary.


4. Contents of the PSS inventory

  Several conclusions can be drawn from this exercise of creating an inventory that
provides insights into the concept of PSS and their application in practice. Firstly,
the numbers of PSS are increasing world-wide. Whilst the inventory contained
approximately contributions from several diﬀerent countries across the world, the
PSS selected for detailed speciﬁcation in Geertman and Stillwell (2003) originate
from 15 diﬀerent countries. Most of the PSS appear to have been developed very
recently, with only a small minority being over 5 years of age. As a consequence,
         S. Geertman, J. Stillwell / Comput., Environ. and Urban Systems 28 (2004) 291–310   295


many of the PSS represented in the inventory are not mature, and some are still in
an experimental or prototype stage of development. Certainly, the large majority of
PSS are not available as proprietary, oﬀ-the-shelf systems.
  A second important conclusion is that experience with PSS in actual planning
practice is very limited. The real-world application of many systems seems to be
conﬁned to experimental trials, such as educational meetings with students or
training sessions with professional planners, for instance. A small number of the
systems have indeed matured into a stage of professional application. However, at
the moment, the extent of these applications is limited and this makes it diﬃcult to
present robust conclusions and recommendations.
  A third conclusion is that those systems recorded in the inventory reﬂect a very
wide range of application areas. It is fruitful to examine this diversity in more detail,
because this conveys the actual contribution that PSS are making and the potential
of the systems for use in diﬀerent areas of planning practice. The diversity is
apparent in the aims, capabilities, content, structure and technology of the PSS, as
well as in their appearance to users.

4.1. Aims

  The PSS contained in the inventory have a wide diversity of aims. Some are
dedicated to facilitate and/or enhance participation by the public and/or of stake-
holders in the planning process; others can be characterised as tools dedicated to
support speciﬁc tasks within planning processes like the uniform handling of build-
ing permits; others have been developed to inform the public about diﬀerent plan-
ning and policy topics in their region or country; and others support speciﬁc forms
of planning by practitioners such as strategic planning, land-use and infrastructure
planning or environmental planning. Two very diﬀerent PSS illustrate this diversity
of aims in the category of environmental planning; one is an area-speciﬁc system
known as the Planning System for Sustainable Development (PSSD) and the other is
a task-speciﬁc system known as SPARTACUS.
  The so-called PSSD is dedicated to support the tasks of professional planners in
the Baltic Sea Region to enhance the sustainability of their policies (Hansen, 2001).
Developed by a consortium of Finnish, Danish and German partners, it contains a
wide diversity of instruments, put together on a web site, consisting of best practices,
sustainability indicators, associated theories, scientiﬁc documents, supporting tools,
meta-information, geo-data and dedicated methods. These instruments are inter-
connected, providing the opportunity to relate a speciﬁc planning question to some
associated underlying theoretical notions that lead to the selection of dedicated
methods, tools and data to handle the speciﬁc task in accordance with the (meta-)
information provided. Fig. 1 illustrates an outcome of the PSSD, showing the result
of an accessibility analysis within the Finnish region of Päijät-Häme. Accessibility is
calculated by measuring travel time from each grid cell to the nearest of four diﬀer-
ent size categories of urban centres and then summarised. The result is a relative,
and therefore comparable, measure of accessibility of urban centres, based on the
principle of gravity modelling. The darker cells of the two urban centres in the south
296      S. Geertman, J. Stillwell / Comput., Environ. and Urban Systems 28 (2004) 291–310




             Fig. 1. PSSD interface showing the accessibility of centres near Helsinki.



of Fig. 1 indicate the relatively good accessibility via the road of these urban centres
(http://www.pssdtoolbox.net/plannertool.htm).
  In contrast, the SPARTACUS system (System for Planning and Research in
Towns and Cities for Urban Sustainability) is more task-speciﬁc and has been
developed by another consortium of partners from Finland, the UK, Spain and
Germany. It is dedicated to support sustainable urban policies at diﬀerent locations
and it consists of a land use/transport model (MEPLAN) combined with a set of
urban sustainability indicators, a GIS-based Raster method to calculate values for
some of the indicators, the MEPLUS database and presentation module as well as a
decision support tool (USE-IT) with which the results of policy options can be
evaluated for their social, environmental and economic eﬀects (Lautso, 2002). As a
consequence of its area independence, it has been and can be applied in diﬀerent
locations for assessing options for urban sustainability policies in a systematic way.
Its application for three test cities (Helsinki, Bilbao, and Naples) shows that the level
of sustainability can be increased in a cost-eﬀective way by using a variety of poli-
cies, especially pricing and regulatory policies and their combinations. Combining
policies can mitigate the negative side eﬀects of individual policies. Fig. 2 shows
both the main modules of the SPARTACUS system and a sample outcome of its
noise propagation and pollutant dispersion models applied also to the Helsinki
Metropolitan Area in Finland. The basic idea behind SPARTACUS is that land
          S. Geertman, J. Stillwell / Comput., Environ. and Urban Systems 28 (2004) 291–310    297




Fig. 2. SPARTACUS system modules (left) and sample noise model output for the Helsinki Metropolitan
Area (right).



uses, transport and the environment are inextricably linked and cannot be planned
in isolation. Therefore, the MEPLAN model brings together the relevant informa-
tion on transport, land use and economic activity. Development strategies can then
be simulated through the model by changing the inputs in order to represent a pro-
posed change in the real world. The model outputs then provide an indication of the
wider socio-economic and environmental eﬀects of introducing the change and these
eﬀects can be evaluated against an alternative strategy or a ‘do-nothing’ scenario
(http://www.ltcon.ﬁ/spartacus/default.htm).

4.2. Capabilities

   As with the aims, the capabilities of PSS in the inventory show enormous varia-
tion. Some are dedicated to support modelling activities for future population dis-
tributions or land-use patterns; some provide tools to support the sketching of new
spatial structures; and others are designed purely to allow the visualization of
potential spatial developments in all kinds of diﬀerent ways. Two systems, GAMe
and K2vI, can be used to exemplify this diversity.
   The New Jersey Growth Allocation Model, known as GAMe, is a PSS designed
for interactive use that identiﬁes the implications of certain trend-based or plan-
based scenarios on land development. It has been developed by the New Jersey
Oﬃce of State Planning (Reilly, 2002) and it allows users to explore various land-use
policies in light of both the existing conditions in their town or region and the values
and goals of the user. Thus, the model takes user-selected policy choices and fore-
casts how these policies would aﬀect the location of growth (or decline) and the
costs associated with the resulting land-use pattern. Fig. 3 shows schematically the
iterative process of exploration of various land-use policies with the help of GAMe.
Based on a regional forecast of relative municipal growth within the region and on a
298      S. Geertman, J. Stillwell / Comput., Environ. and Urban Systems 28 (2004) 291–310




         Fig. 3. The iterative process of exploring land-use policies with the help of GAMe.



user-deﬁned policy plan scenario, GAMe produces municipality growth estimates
and forecasts a range of variables at the municipality scale, like mean household
income and average household size. Moreover, it forecasts various impacts asso-
ciated with each scenario, like capital costs associated with public school buildings
and public sewer facilities costs. Using GAMe, the user can learn if various land-use
policies achieve their growth management objectives and identify some of the asso-
ciated cost impacts of the resulting land-use pattern. Through the iterative process
of trial, evaluation and policy modiﬁcation, the user discovers a preferred set of
land-use development policies that produce a land development pattern and its
associated costs, which are acceptable and compatible with the goals and values of
the person or group.
  K2vI (Key to Virtual Insight), on the other hand, is a PSS that allows users to
visualise, manipulate and analyse two-dimensional and three-dimensional spatial
data within a virtual reality (VR) environment. It was developed initially in the
Departments of Geodesy and Technical Informatics at Delft University of Tech-
nology (DUT) in co-operation with several engineering companies and the ITC
(International Institute for Aerospace Survey and Earth Sciences). Since 1999, K2vI
has been further developed for urban, military, sports and forestry applications in a
joint eﬀort involving Asset Information Systems in New Zealand and the DUT. The
software uses the multi-view mode approach where each view mode has a preferred
VR display system. Of particular interest is the fact that K2vI allows the direct
interaction between two-dimensional and three-dimensional GIS and computer-
aided design (CAD) data from within the VR environment. In that way, spatial
objects can be analysed, manipulated and visualized directly in two and three
dimensions without bothering about conversion matters. Fig. 4 illustrates K2vI by
providing three diﬀerent views of the centre of the city of Auckland in New Zealand
(http://www.k2vi.com/).
         S. Geertman, J. Stillwell / Comput., Environ. and Urban Systems 28 (2004) 291–310        299




    Fig. 4. K2vI interface showing three diﬀerent views of the centre of Auckland, New Zealand.


4.3. Content

  We have already established that a PSS is a ‘toolbox’ containing various compo-
nents including data sets, (meta-) information, storage and query tools, analysis
methods, theories, indicators, etc., as exempliﬁed by the PSSD. Other PSS, however,
are much more specialised and contain only very speciﬁc software components to
perform speciﬁc tasks. Two examples to illustrate specialised PSS are MIGMOD
and BIPC model.
  MIGMOD is an example of a PSS that deals with strategic planning support at a
national level. It is a prototype internal migration modelling system that was built
for the Department of Transport, Local Government and the Regions (DTLR) in
the UK by a consortium of researchers based primarily at the Universities of New-
castle and Leeds (Champion, Bramley, Fotheringham, Macgill, & Rees, 2002; Oﬃce
of the Deputy Prime Minister, 2002). Its purpose is to assist in the understanding of
the impacts of changes in various indicators (determinants) on the volume and
patterns of internal migration within the UK. At the heart of the system is a two-
stage spatial interaction modelling system: a generation model of the ﬂows of out-
migrants from a set of regions and a distribution model, which allocates the
300       S. Geertman, J. Stillwell / Comput., Environ. and Urban Systems 28 (2004) 291–310


predicted out-migrants to destination regions. Both models are driven by sets of
explanatory variables and calibrated on historical time series data using Poisson
regression techniques, before being used for predicting change under diﬀerent
scenarios. Fig. 5 illustrates sample outputs of MIGMOD. On the left hand side, is
one example of the user interface tables showing baseline model predictions of ﬂows
between a selection of regions of male migrants aged 16–19 in 1996–1997; on the
right hand side is an example of the interface mapping facilities showing predicted
ﬂows of males aged 16–19 from Leeds to the other 98 regions in the system (and an
observed ﬂow included for Northern Ireland).
  The BIPC model refers to the Bulk Infrastructure Potential Cost model and pro-
vides a means for the incorporation of bulk engineering services (water, sanitation,
and electricity) cost considerations into the strategic planning process during land
suitability assessment (Biermann, 2002). It has been developed by the CSIR Building
and Construction Technology in South Africa as a PSS for planners and develop-
ment decision-makers to enhance the integration of land-use and infrastructure
planning. The model is based on threshold analysis, which indicates steep rises in the
marginal cost curves associated with further development. Potential costs are cal-
culated on the basis of capacity in the existing system and include additional cost
factors such as geo-technical, land-use and environmental conditions to further
enhance cost accuracy. The output of the model is in the form of potential cost
contours, which facilitates the relative comparison of infrastructure costs for diﬀer-
ent density scenarios. Fig. 6 shows the three constituting elements of the bulk
infrastructure potential cost model. It indicates that when the number of people
increases within an area, the infrastructure (e.g., pipes, reservoirs) has to expand,
which possesses physical dimensions or thresholds (e.g., pipe diameter, reservoir
capacity) directly proportional to size of the infrastructure. The relationship
between density and threshold dictates whether or not additional infrastructure




 Fig. 5. MIGMOD interface showing predictions of out-migration ﬂows in table (left) and map (right).
          S. Geertman, J. Stillwell / Comput., Environ. and Urban Systems 28 (2004) 291–310    301




Fig. 6. BIPC model (left) and its output based on MCA including bulk infrastructure potential costs
(right).




expenditure is necessary to accommodate additional people. In addition, it shows as
an example the combined cost output of the BIPC model based on a multi-criteria
suitability assessment (MCA) including bulk infrastructure potential costs for the
city council of Pretoria.

4.4. Structure

   PSS diﬀer too in their structure in that some can be considered fully integrated
systems in which all components are interconnected closely and others have com-
ponents that are only loosely connected tools within a container. WadBos is an
illustration of the former category, SketchGIS of the latter.
   WadBos is an integrated PSS for the Wadden Sea, an important estuarine system
in the northern part of the Netherlands. Although it is considered a protected nat-
ural site, it also has important economic functions including, for example, ﬁshing,
recreation, transportation and gas exploitation. The management of the diﬀerent
activities and functions of the area are distributed over a great number of institu-
tions, ranging from the local to the European. In order to streamline the process of
decision-making, WadBos was developed as a highly integrated model representing
the ecological and the economic functions of the sea (Engelen, 2000). The compo-
nent sub-models of WadBOS represent processes operating at diﬀerent time scales
and at diﬀerent spatial scales. WadBOS allows a user to assess the eﬀects of policy
interventions on the system, to provide insights into both individual domains and
the linkages in between the individual domains; to visualize the anticipated policy
eﬀects, and to gather and link knowledge concerning the questions at stake. Fig. 7
illustrates WadBOS, showing in diﬀerent visual formats (texts, graphs, maps) the
302      S. Geertman, J. Stillwell / Comput., Environ. and Urban Systems 28 (2004) 291–310




Fig. 7. WadBos interface showing disturbing consequences of recreational boating on the Wadden Sea.




disturbing consequences of recreational boating on the Wadden Sea for diﬀerent
spatial and time scales (http://www.netcoast.nl/tools/rikz/WADBOS.htm).
   SketchGIS is a stand-alone toolbox developed to support the ﬁrst phase of a par-
ticipatory plan-making process, the creation and evaluation of spatial scenarios for
the future. It has been developed by a consortium of public and private sector
organisations in the Netherlands and it incorporates a diversity of loosely coupled
tools with which associated tasks can be performed: brainstorming sessions can be
facilitated by oﬀering tools to identify and store relationships between interesting
topics (concept mapping); area-speciﬁc data and information in diﬀerent formats
(text documents, HTML-pages, photographic material, three-dimensional ﬁgures,
etc.) can be handled and presented; the process of sketching spatial scenarios
(designing areas for new housing or industry, for example) can be supported; these
sketched scenarios can be evaluated with the help of a MCA tool; and the sketched
scenarios can be presented in a two- and three-dimensional way (Geertman, 2002a).
With the help of the SketchGIS toolbox participants within a collaborative planning
session can design and discuss expectable, potential and/or desirable futures for their
own living area. Fig. 8 illustrates the design tool as part of the SketchGIS toolbox
with the help of which spatial scenarios can be sketched freely on a background
map. It shows the area of the so-called Randmeren, located in the centre of the
         S. Geertman, J. Stillwell / Comput., Environ. and Urban Systems 28 (2004) 291–310       303




        Fig. 8. SketchGIS toolbox for interactive and participatory spatial scenario building.


Netherlands, for which a scenario is generated wherein areas are identiﬁed and
sketched, suitable for transformation to other land-use categories.

4.5. Technology

   In the case of applied technology, some PSS are stand-alone programs while
others are developed solely for the Intranet or Internet. Two examples to illustrate
this diversity are What if?TM and WBBRIS. The former is a stand-alone policy-
oriented planning tool that can be used to determine what will happen if certain
policy choices are made (e.g. spatial restriction on urbanization growth) and assump-
tions concerning the future (e.g. population growth rates) prove to be correct
(Klosterman, 1999b). It projects future land-use patterns by balancing the supply of,
and demand for, land suitable for diﬀerent uses at diﬀerent locations, subject to user-
speciﬁed policies for allocating the projected demand to suitable locations. Alternative
visions for an area’s future can be explored by deﬁning alternative suitability, growth
and allocation scenarios. Fig. 9 illustrates What if?TM by showing projected land use
scenarios (http://www.what-if-pss.com/). It shows the morphological picture of land
use in Medina County, Ohio, US, in which the left hand picture indicates the
expected land-use conﬁguration for six land-use types for 2045 under conditions of
restricted growth controls. In contrast, the right hand picture shows the expected
land use conﬁguration for six land-use types for 2045 without restricted growth
controls, leading to a very dispersed pattern of residential land use.
   In contrast to the stand-alone What if?TM PSS, an Internet-based PSS has been
developed for the Wide Bay-Burnett region (WBBRIS, the Wide Bay-Burnett
Regional Information System) of Queensland, Australia (Pettit, Shyy, & Stimson,
304        S. Geertman, J. Stillwell / Comput., Environ. and Urban Systems 28 (2004) 291–310




Fig. 9. Output from What if? TM showing restricted and unrestricted land use growth control scenarios in
Medina County, OH, US.


2002) that incorporates a suite of SDSS tools to undertake multi-scaled planning
analysis. For instance, users can perform dynamic analyses of regional demographic
and employment trends to formulate thematic maps and associated tabular data
results. At the local urban level, users can review the results of a number of ‘what-if’
planning scenarios based on an MCA approach. By providing access to both spa-
tially aggregated and disaggregated socio-economic data, land data and other
essential statistical information, linkages between regional and urban scales of ana-
lysis can be made such as regional employment shift-share analysis and MCA for
local land suitability. Fig. 10 shows the homepage of the WBBRIS regional system




           Fig. 10. Wide Bay-Burnett Regional Information System (WBBRIS) homepage.
         S. Geertman, J. Stillwell / Comput., Environ. and Urban Systems 28 (2004) 291–310   305


(http://www.ahuri.uq.edu.au/wide_bay/default.htm). The area being studied is
identiﬁed, accompanied by several tools like shift-share analysis and input–output
analysis, and the various scenarios (economic; social; environmental) that can be
applied. Speciﬁc to the WBBRIS system architecture is the fact that remote users
can login the system and receive not just static information (HTML pages) but also
dynamic information (produced at distance and on demand by an Internet GIS
server) concerning the topic requested.
   The examples that we have selected in this section provide insights into the diver-
sity of PSS that can be found in contemporary planning practice. In addition to the
criteria that we have used to summarize the PSS, other criteria can be identiﬁed such
as age (some PSS have existed for over 10 years now), professionalism (some are in a
stage of prototyping while others are fully-grown products), stage of commerciali-
sation (some are mature oﬀ-the-shelf commercial products, others are available free
of charge) or targeted populations (stakeholders, policy-makers, planners, wider
public). Assessment of the utility of the PSS contained in the inventory for actual
planning practice still has to be fully and properly evaluated. This however, will
require a longer period for practitioners to work with these systems and to gain
experience with their practical application. The recommendations in the next
section, with which we conclude the paper, can be of help in this evaluation.


5. Recommendations

   Based on the relatively small number of real world experiences with PSS, some
recommendations can be made about the future of PSS development and applica-
tion. First, PSS should be an integral part of the planning process and context. The
Shaping Dane Project website (http://www.lic.wisc.edu/shapingdane/) is an excellent
example of where diﬀerent planning and participatory activities are linked to each of
the planning phases. For participants, it is important to know at which phase of the
planning process one can perform each particular kind of task or activity. A con-
sequence of this is that PSS should be attuned to the speciﬁc characteristics of the
planning process and context at hand. Each planning process is subject to certain
time constraints, allows for a particular degree of participation, involves a certain
amount of publicity, etc., and these factors inﬂuence the potential for and restric-
tions on the use of the technology. Likewise, the characteristics of the policy context
(e.g., democracy or autocracy) inﬂuence the preferred technology (e.g., transparent
or black-box) and the way in which it is used. For instance, a participatory planning
process and context deﬁnes a very diﬀerent set of criteria with which the PSS must
conform in comparison to the classical planning process and context in which just
planning professionals make use of the PSS. The diﬀerences involved relate to
characteristics such as interactivity, ﬂexibility, adaptability, maintainability and
scale dependence.
   Second, related to the ﬁrst recommendation, PSS should meet user and context
requirements too, besides the conformation to requirements of the planning process
and context. For example, PSS should be developed that reﬂect the knowledge and
306      S. Geertman, J. Stillwell / Comput., Environ. and Urban Systems 28 (2004) 291–310


skills of their direct applicants, which may involve meeting multiple levels of exper-
tise. They should be attuned to the professional tasks required at a certain phase in
the planning process (sketching, modelling, impact assessment and evaluation) and
to the capabilities of the audience with whom communication is required, i.e.,
knowledge and skill levels of lay persons and/or stakeholders as well as more tech-
nical users. Obviously, these user and context requirements will be very diﬀerent and
probably much more diﬃcult to meet within a participatory planning process than
in a classical planning process. The diversity of knowledge and skill levels of users
within participatory planning processes will put tighter demands on the PSS to
communicate properly the relevant planning information.
   Third, one should be aware of the fact that people address issues from an inter-
disciplinary perspective. In contrast to science in which the study of reality has been
categorized in separated disciplines, laypersons do not tend to think in accordance
with distinct disciplines but in terms of integrated systems or parts thereof. In prac-
tice, people encounter problems and ask for solutions and usually neither the pro-
blems nor the solutions will be conﬁned to the artiﬁcial boundaries of disciplines. As
a consequence, PSS that intend to connect to peoples’ way of thinking should
address issues in an interdisciplinary manner, linking the spatial to the social, the
environmental to the economic and so forth.
   Fourth, PSS should take seriously its users and leave them with the feeling that
they have been taken seriously. Although this sounds very much like a statement of
the obvious, experience suggests that this is not always the case. For example, the
population of one local community in the USA have participated actively in plan-
ning sessions in which environmentally sensitive futures have been designed for their
region, whilst at the same time, the Governor of the State in which their region is
located and who has claimed to be a strong protagonist of participative sessions, is
making secret deals with Federal Government for the construction of a large nuclear
waste disposal site in that region.
   Fifth, the user-interface of the PSS should be sensitive to the characteristics of the
user, to the kind of information that it communicates to that user, and to the types
of intended use that is made of the information provided. For instance, in general
one might presume that people are highly visual in their requirements for
communication, thinking and forms of expression. Consequently, it might be
assumed that imagery such as photos, three-dimensional images, architectural
drawings, cardboard replicas and VR-movies, would be highly eﬀective in the
understanding and communication of diﬀerent visions for the future, and much
more so than text statements about diﬀerent scenarios. However, in particular
instances, these visualisations can be highly inappropriate and even undesirable in
communication processes, for instance, when these visualisations distort reality
purposefully to achieve selective or biased interests.
   Sixth, obviously the PSS should be focused in particular on the planning problem
at hand. For some strategically oriented planning tasks, this means the incor-
poration of tools for sketching, modelling and impact analysis. The activities of
detecting the most likely future, exploring potential scenarios, and/or designing
desirable futures belong to the core of strategic planning tasks. In that, of particular
           S. Geertman, J. Stillwell / Comput., Environ. and Urban Systems 28 (2004) 291–310         307


interest is the question of acceptance of the inputs (such as reliable, up-to-date data)
and outputs (such as meaningful modelling results) of a PSS. In general, transpar-
ency is seen as one of the most important prerequisites for support tools and for the
way in which they are handled.
  Finally, PSS should be appealing; they should fulﬁl participants’ needs and
wishes, and allow the participants to enjoy using them too. Especially in circum-
stances in which people are expected to invest their free time to participate in
planning sessions, one should be aware of the sensitivities associated with this
investment of time and energy. Various means can be used to ensure that PSS
encourage participation, including the incorporation of some type of competition
(with prizes available) or the establishment of resource centres as places equipped
with decision/planning support tools to structure and promote dialogue and com-
munity issues.
  In summary, we can conclude that the application of PSS is currently still in its
infancy and there does not yet exist a reservoir of real-world experience with PSS
with which to conduct a detailed evaluation. However, there is little doubt that the
development of PSS is on an upward trajectory, that new and exciting tools are
being created and applied in diﬀerent parts of the world and that future innovations
will be stimulated as the awareness of contemporary systems, as exempliﬁed in this
paper, becomes more widespread in planning practice.



Acknowledgements

  The authors would like to thank Max Craglia (University of Sheﬃeld, UK), Paul
Longley (University College London, UK) and the anonymous referees of CEUS
for their valuable comments on an earlier version of the paper.




References

Biermann, S. (2002). An infrastructure potential cost model for integrated land use and infrastructure
  planning. In S. Geertman, & J. Stillwell (Eds.), Planning support systems in practice. Heidelberg:
  Springer.
Bishop, I. (1998). Planning support: hardware and software in search of a system. Computers, Environ-
  ment and Urban Systems, 22(3), 189–202.
Brail, R., Klosterman, R. (Eds.). (2001). Planning support systems: integrating geographic information
  systems models, and visualization tools. Redlands: ESRI-Press.
Champion, T., Bramley, G., Fotheringham, S., Macgill, J., & Rees, P. (2002). A migration modelling
  system to support government decision-making. In S. Geertman, & J. Stillwell (Eds.), Planning support
  systems in practice. Heidelberg: Springer.
Clarke, M. (1990). Geographical information systems and model-based analysis: towards eﬀective deci-
  sion support systems. In H. Scholten, & J. Stillwell (Eds.), Geographical information systems for urban
  and regional planning (pp. 165–175). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
308        S. Geertman, J. Stillwell / Comput., Environ. and Urban Systems 28 (2004) 291–310


Couclelis, H. (1989). Geographically informed planning: requirements for planning relevant GIS.
  Paper presented to the 36th North American Meeting of Regional Science Association, Santa
  Barbara.
Densham, P. (1991). Spatial decision support systems. In D. J. Maguire, M. F. Goodchild, &
  D. W. Rhind (Eds.), Geographical information systems: principles and applications (pp. 403–412).
  London: Longman.
Engelen, G. (2000). The development of the WadBOS decision support system. A bridge between knowledge
  and policy in the Wadden Sea. The Hague: National Institute for Coastal and Marine Management.
Geertman, S. (1999). Geographical information technology and physical planning. In J. Stillwell,
  S. Geertman, & S. Openshaw (Eds.), Geographical information and planning (pp. 69–86). Heidelberg:
  Springer Verlag.
Geertman, S. (2002a). Participatory planning and GIS: a PSS to bridge the gap. Environment and Planning
  B: Planning and Design, 29, 21–35.
Geertman, S., & Stillwell, J. (Eds.). (2003). Planning support systems in practice. Heidelberg: Springer
  Verlag.
Gordon, Th., Karacapilidis, N. Voss, H., & Zauke, A. (1997) Computer-mediated cooperative spatial plan-
  ning, in Timmermans, H. (Ed.), Decision support systems in urban planning (pp. 299–309), E. & F. N. Spon.
Hansen, H. (2001). PSSD—planning system for sustainable development. The Methodological Report
  (NERI technical report no 351). Denmark: National Environmental Research Institute.
Harris, B. (1998). Optimization and design. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design; Anniver-
  sary Issue, 23–28.
Harris, B. (1999). Computing in planning: professional and institutional requirements. Environment and
  Planning B: Planning and Design, 26, 321–331.
Harris, B., & Batty, M. (1993). Locational models, geographic information and planning support systems.
  Journal of Planning Education and Research, 12, 184–198.
Hopkins, L. (1998). Progress and prospects for planning support systems. Environment and Planning B:
  Planning and Design (Anniversary Issue), 29–31.
Hopkins, L. (1999). Structure of a planning support system for urban development. Environment and
  Planning B: Planning and Design, 26, 333–343.
Kammeier, H. (1999). New tools for spatial analysis and planning as components of an incremental
  planning-support system. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 26, 365–380.
Klosterman, R. (1994). International support for computers in planning. Environment and Planning B:
  Planning and Design, 2, 387–391.
Klosterman, R. (1997). Planning support systems: a new perspective on computer-aided planning. Journal
  of Planning Education and Research, 17(1), 45–54.
Klosterman, R. (1999a). Guest editorial: new perspectives on planning support systems. Environment and
  Planning B: Planning and Design, 26, 317–320.
Klosterman, R. (1999b). The What if? collaborative planning support system. Environment and Planning
  B: Planning and Design, 26, 393–408.
Laurini, R. (1998). Groupware for urban planning: an introduction. Computers, Environment and Urban
  Systems, 22(4), 317–333.
Lautso, K. (2002). The SPARTACUS system for deﬁning and analysing sustainable urban land use
  and transport policies. In S. Geertman, & J. Stillwell (Eds.), Planning support systems in practice.
  Heidelberg: Springer.
Nedovic-Budic, Z. (1998). The impact of GIS technology. Environment and Planning B: Planning and
  Design, 25, 681–692.
Nyerges, T., & Jankowski, P. (1997). Adaptive structuration theory: a theory of GIS-supported colla-
  borative decision making. Geographical Systems, 4(3), 225–259.
Oﬃce of the Deputy Prime Minister (2002). Development of a migration model. Housing research summary
  no. 167. Rotherham: ODPM Publication Sales Centre.
Ottens, H. (1990). The application of geographical information systems in urban and regional planning.
  In H. J. Scholten, & J. C. H. Stillwell (Eds.), Geographical information systems for urban and regional
  planning (pp. 15–22). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
           S. Geertman, J. Stillwell / Comput., Environ. and Urban Systems 28 (2004) 291–310             309


Pettit, C., Shyy, T-K., & Stimson, R. (2002). An on-line planning support system to evaluate urban and
  regional planning scenarios. In S. Geertman, & J. Stillwell (Eds.), Planning support systems in practice.
  Heidelberg: Springer.
Reilly, J. (2002). The New Jersey (USA) Growth allocation model: development, evaluation and exten-
  sion. In S. Geertman, & J. Stillwell (Eds.), Planning support systems in practice. Heidelberg: Springer.
Scholten, H., Stillwell, J. (Eds.). (1990). Geographical information systems for urban and regional planning.
  Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Shiﬀer, M. (1992). Towards a collaborative planning system. Environment and Planning B: Planning and
  Design, 19, 709–722.
Singh, R. (1999). Sketching the city: a GIS-based approach. Environment and Planning B: Planning and
  Design, 26, 455–468.
Stillwell, J., Geertman, S., & Openshaw, S. (1999a). Developments in geographical information and
  planning. In J. Stillwell, S. Geertman, & S. Openshaw (Eds.), Geographical information and planning
  (pp. 3–22). Heidelberg: Springer Verlag.
Worrall, L. (1994). The role of GIS-based spatial analysis in strategic management in local government.
  Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 18(5), 323–332.




Further reading

Batty, M., & Densham, P. (1996). Decision support, GIS, and urban planning. Sistema Terra, 5(1), 72–76.
Eleveld, M., Carreau, P., Schrimpf, W., & Siegert, A. (2002). DESIMA: a decision support tool for inte-
  grated coastal zone management. In S. Geertman, & J. Stillwell (Eds.), Planning support systems in
  practice. Heidelberg: Springer.
Engelen, G., Geertman, S., Smits, P., & Wessels, C. (1999). Dynamic GIS and strategic physical planning
  support: a practical application. In J. Stillwell, S. Geertman, & S. Openshaw (Eds.), Geographical
  information and planning (pp. 87–111). Heidelberg: Springer Verlag.
Friedmann, J. (1987). Planning in the public domain; from knowledge to action. Princeton: Princeton
  University Press.
Friend, J., & Jessop, W. (1969). Local government and strategic choice: an operational research approach to
  the processes of public planning. London: Tavistock Publications.
Geertman, S. (2001). Planning support by PSS: an inventory. Paper presented at the CUPUM-2001
  Conference, Honolulu.
Geertman, S. (2002b) Inventory of planning support systems in planning practice; conclusions and
  reﬂections. In M. Ruiz, M. Gould, J. Ramon (Eds.), 5th AGILE Conference on Geographic Information
  Science (pp. 35–40).
Geertman, S., & Stillwell, J. (2000). Geoinformation, geotechnology and geoplanning in the 1990s. (Working
  paper 00/01). School of Geography, University of Leeds, Leeds.
Harris, B. (1960). Plan or projection: an examination of the use of models in planning. Journal of the
  American Institute of Planners, 26(4), 265–272.
Harris, B. (1989). Beyond geographic information systems: computers and the planning professional.
  Journal of the American Planning Association, 55, 85–90.
Hopkins, L., & Armstrong, M. P. (1985) Analytic and cartographic data storage: a two-tiered approach to
  Spatial Decision Support Systems. In Proceedings of the seventh International Symposium on Computer-
  assisted Cartography: Auto-Carto 7 (pp. 283–292). Falls Church, VA: American Society for Photo-
  grammetry and American Congress on Surveying and Mapping.
Klosterman, R. (1998). Computer applications in planning. Environment and Planning B: Planning and
  Design (Anniversary Issue), 32–36.
Lee, D. (1973). Requiem for large-scale models. Journal of the American Institute of Planners, Washington,
  May, 163–178.
Niemann, B., Heinzel, W., Ventura, S., Sutphin, T., & Miskowiak, D. (1999). Mapping growth management
310        S. Geertman, J. Stillwell / Comput., Environ. and Urban Systems 28 (2004) 291–310


  factors (Land Information Bulletin technical paper no 2). UW-Madison: Land Information and
  Computer Graphics Facility.
Scholten, H., van de Velde, R., Rietveld, P., & Hilferink, M. (1999). Spatial information infrastructure for
  scenario planning: the development of a land use planner for Holland. In J. Stillwell, S. Geertman, &
  S. Openshaw (Eds.), Geographical information and planning (pp. 112–134). Heidelberg: Springer Verlag.
See, L., & Openshaw, S. (1999). Applying soft computing approaches to river level forecasting. Hydro-
  logical Sciences Journal, 44, 763–778.
See, L., & Openshaw, S. (2000). A hybrid multi-model approach to river level forecasting. Hydrological
  Sciences Journal, 45(4), 523–536.
Shiﬀer, M. (1995). Interactive multimedia planning support: moving from stand-alone systems to the
  World Wide Web. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 22, 649–664.
Simmonds, D. (2001). The objectives and design of a new land-use modelling package: DELTA. In
  G. Clarke, & M. Madden (Eds.), Regional science in business (pp. 115–157). Heidelberg: Springer.
Stillwell, J., Geertman, S., Openshaw, S. (Eds.). (1999b). Geographical information and planning.
  Heidelberg: Springer Verlag.
Stillwell, J., & Scholten, H. (Eds.). (2001). Land use simulation for Europe. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
