[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: journal/M12-klosterman-1999-the-what-if-collaborative-planning-support-system-10.1068-b260393.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Producer:        ABBYY FineReader 8.0 Professional Edition
CreationDate:    Thu Oct  4 16:30:04 2007 WIB
ModDate:         Thu Oct  4 16:30:11 2007 WIB
Custom Metadata: no
Metadata Stream: yes
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            AcroForm
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           16
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       425.64 x 679.44 pts
Page rot:        0
File size:       4856402 bytes
Optimized:       yes
PDF version:     1.6
[Extracted Text]
ijivnonmcti! and I'htnninx H Phmntnv iiml hcsiyn llWJ, volume .Vi. p.iin's \{) \ 40.S




The What if? collaborative planning support system



R 1* Kl os term an
Department of Geography and Planning. University of Akron. Akron, Ohio -14 ^25-5005, USA,
e-mail: Klostcrmuruc UAkron.cdu
Received 6 February 1WH; in revised Conn 26 November 1W.X



Abstract. In this paper I will describe What if?, a scenario-based, policy-oriented planning support
system (PSS) that uses increasingly available CHS data to support community-based processes of
collaborative planning and collective decisionmaking. It incorporates procedures for conducting
land suitability analysis, projecting future land-use demands, and allocating the projected demands
to the most suitable locations. The system allows users easily to create alternative development
scenarios and determine the likely impacts of alternative public-policy choices on future land-use
patterns and associated population and employment trends. It is easy to use, can be customized to the
user's database and policy issues, and provides outputs in easy to understand maps and reports.

Introduction
The field of urban and regional planning is experiencing two fundamental changes that
are having a profound impact on the use of computer-based models in planning
practice and education. On the one hand, the dramatically increased availability o(
powerful, low-cost, and easy to use GIS tools and more extensive spatially referenced
data are making GIS an essential tool for planning tasks such as land-use monitoring,
code enforcement, and permit tracking. However, with this increased use has come
an increased realization that GIS alone cannot serve all of the needs of planning (for
example, see Couclelis, 1991; Harris, 1989; Harris and Batty, 1993). This realization has
renewed planners' interest in computer modeling and stimulated the development of
planning support systems (PSS) which combine GIS (and non-GIS) data, computer-
based models, and advanced visualization techniques into integrated systems to support
core planning functions such as plan preparation and evaluation (for example, see
Finaly and Marples, 1992; Holmberg, 1994; Klosterman, 1997).
    On the other hand, planners are increasingly abandoning the attempt to 'plan
for1 the public and opting for more collaborative efforts to 'plan with' the public.
These attempts take a variety of forms such as strategic visioning conferences, design
charettes, and other community-based collaborative planning and consensus-building
efforts (for example, see Goldschalk et al, 1994; Lowry et al, 1997). These efforts attempt
to involve private citizens and other stakeholders directly in the planning process to
help identify and prioritize the public's needs and desires, explore alternative develop-
ment scenarios, and establish benchmarks for evaluating ongoing development efforts.
As an ideal, these carefully structured consensus-building processes can help achieve the
ideals of communicative rationality and traditional comprehensive land-use planning
(Healey, 1992; Innes, 1992; 1996).
    What if? is an interactive GIS-based PSS that responds directly to both of these
trends. It uses the GIS data sets that communities have already developed to support
community-based efforts to evaluate the likely implications of alternative public-policy
choices. It provides a single integrated package that allows planning tasks that at
present require weeks or even months to do to be completed quickly and easily.
394                                                                           R E Klosterman




     The package can be customized to a community's existing GIS data, concerns, and
desires, and provides outputs in easy to understand maps and reports which can be
used to support community-based collaborative planning efforts.(1)
     Reflecting the movement from 'planning for the public' to 'planning with the public',
What if? assumes that planning and policymaking should not be based on closed and
unsupervised 'objective' analysis of technical experts. Instead it provides a set of com-
puter-based tools which facilitate open and ongoing processes of community learning,
debate, and compromise. By providing information, techniques, and evaluation criteria
which can be used to support particular public-policy perspectives and critique others,
it supports explicitly political processes of 'adversary' or 'counter' modeling similar to
Davidoff's (1965) advocacy planning model. By involving the public directly in the
planning process, it helps constrain the discretion of professionals and political insiders,
reduces the knowledge differential between professionals and laypersons, and gives the
public a sense of ownership in the plans and proposals which are developed.
    Acknowledging the limitations of planners' knowledge, information, and resources,
the model abandons the unrealistic goal of producing a single 'exact' prediction of the
future for the preparation of a range of alternative scenario-based forecasts which
reveal a range of potential futures. With the recognition that models are useful in a
policy context only if they are understood by policymakers, the underlying structure,
relationships, and assumptions of What if? are made as explicit and clear as possible.
Most importantly, as its name suggests, the model adopts the 'what if metaphor
popularized by electronic spreadsheets by acknowledging that the model results iden-
tify only what would happen z/the underlying assumptions in a scenario are correct.
It does this by explicitly identifying alternative policy choices, allowing users to choose
between these alternatives and to determine their likely effects on the area being studied.
Similarly, the underlying assumptions of the model concerning the 'state of nature' are
explicitly stated and easily modified, allowing users to determine the effect that these
assumptions have on the model results (Klosterman, 1987, pages 444-448).
    The remainder of the paper is divided into four sections. The next section provides
an overview of the modeling process and the application areas for which What if? is
most appropriate. The following section describes the three analysis steps that are
incorporated in the model, the procedures for conducting each step, and the associated
model outputs. The second to last section identifies the information and procedures
that are required to adapt the system for use in a particular study area. The paper
concludes with an evaluation of the strengths and weaknesses of the model.

System overview
As its name suggests, What if? does not attempt to predict future conditions exactly.
Instead it is an explicitly policy-oriented planning tool that can be used to determine
what would happen if clearly defined policy choices are made and assumptions con-
cerning the future prove to be correct. Policy choices that can be considered in the
model include the staged expansion of public infrastructure and the implementation of
alternative land-use plans or zoning ordinances. Assumptions for the future that can be
considered in the model include future population and employment trends, assumed
household characteristics, and anticipated development densities.
(1)
    What if? was developed by the Plan it!, LLC, a cooperative venture of Community Analysis
and Planning Systems Inc., Data Chromatics Inc., and LDR International. The first version
of the software was developed to support the preparation of the Western Hamilton County
Comprehensive Plan for a rapidly growing area to the west of Cincinnati, Ohio. The model is
fully operational and documented. A demonstration version is also available. Please contact the
author for information on the current status of the model.
The What if? collaborative planning support system                                   395




    What if? is a *boitom-ujV model which begins with homogeneous land units or
uniform analysis zones (UAZs), applies alternative policy choices to these units* allo-
cates projected land-use demands to them, and then derives regional conditions (such
as population and employment growth trends) by aggregating the values for these land
unils.{2> UAZs arc GIS-generated polygons which are homogeneous in all respects
considered in the model. Thus, for instance, all points within a UAZ have the same
slope, are located in the same municipality, have the same zoning designation, are
within the same distance of an existing or proposed highway, and so on.
    UAZs are created for a study area by using GIS overlay functions to combine all of
the relevant layers of information on natural and human-made features, The map
layers can contain information on natural conditions (for example, slopes, soils, and
scenic vistas), existing and proposed infrastructure (for example, the proximity to
intersections or major roads and the availability of sewer and water service), and
land-use controls such as zoning districts and planned land \\HC$t The UAZs contain
information which was provided in each of the constituent layers, that is, each UAZ
contains information on the slope, the availability of sewer and water service, planned
land use, and so on, for all points lying inside of it.
    As will be described in detail below, What if? projects future land-use patterns by
balancing the supply of, and demand for, land suitable for different uses at different
locations. Alternative visions for an area's future can be explored by defining alter-
native suitability, growth, and allocation scenarios. For example, a 'Trend' scenario
could determine the effects of continuing current development policies. An 'Environ-
mental Protection' scenario might consider the impact of policies that severely limit
growth in scenic areas and on land highly suitable for agricultural uses. A 'Build out*
scenario would reveal the implications of allowing growth to continue until it reached
permitted density levels for all developable parcels in the study area. The assumptions
underlying these and other scenarios can easily be modified to incorporate the full
range of alternative visions for an area's future.
    The results generated by considering these alternative scenarios provide concrete
and understandable expressions of the likely results underlying the policy choices and
assumptions of a scenario. For instance, the model might demonstrate that there is
insufficient land simultaneously to accommodate high growth, low residential densities,
and strict agricultural protection policies, forcing the community to choose between
highly desirable, but inconsistent, policy goals.
    What if? is most appropriate for areas that are experiencing, or anticipating, rapid
urbanization and the associated problems of traffic congestion, inadequate public
infrastructure, and the loss of agricultural and open land. Areas that are currently
undeveloped and will remain so in the future have few impacts and policy options to
consider. Currently developed areas face complex issues of redevelopment and reuse
that are extremely difficult to capture in a computer model. Areas on the urban fringe
experiencing rapid and uncontrolled urbanization and industrialization face difficult
and complex issues of managing growth and maintaining a sound fiscal base. As a
result, What if? is particularly useful in promoting public dialogue and collective
decisionmaking in these rapidly changing areas.
    What if? was developed with Microsoft's Visual Basic and the Environmental Sciences
Research Institute's MapObjects GIS component software. It incorporates many of the
design concepts in the first California Urban Futures (CUF) model (Landis, 1994; 1995)
and similar models such as the Sophisticated Allocation Process (SOAP) model of the
(2)
    The term 'uniform analysis zone' (UAZ) is used instead of Landis's (1994) comparable
concept of 'developable land unit' (DLU) because these spatial units may, or may not, be
'developable', depending on a particular set of scenario assumptions.
396                                                                        R E Klosterman




San Diego Association of Governments (1994). However, it is unique in providing a
portable system which can be adapted to any community's GIS data and policy issues.

Using the model
As shown in figure 1, the What if? opening screen contains the standard Windows menu
bar, File, and JHelp options. In addition, it includes three specialized menu options,
Suitability, Growth, and Allocation, which correspond to the three procedural steps—
determining land-use suitability, projecting land-use demands, and allocating projected
demands—incorporated into the model. These options are described briefly below.

 B e SjHhlty   growth A'iocahon jjejp




Figure 1. The What if? opening screen.

Determining land-use suitability
The first stage in the What if? analysis process, determining land-use suitability, incor-
porates standard 'weighting and rating5 procedures (Hopkins, 1977; McHarg, 1969) that
take weeks or months to complete by hand into a quick and easy computer-based
process. The suitability analysis process begins by modifying a previously defined suit-
ability scenario or by creating a new one. This is done by selecting the Suitability Define
Scenario option from the main What if? menu to access the suitability scenario selection
form shown in figure 2. This form can be used to create a new suitability scenario or
to review, revise, or delete a previously defined suitability scenario selected from the
drop-down list.
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^                                    3XM~IHJNI
                                                         .
        Scenario      j R u r a | Preservation                " ' ~QK\
                                                   ._#
        Description                                              tm
         This ccenano emphasises preservation of
         agricultural land and natural features.
                                                         i"      Delete


                                                                 Cancel
                                                         1
                                                                 Help '
 *       5£ fead QnjySGenrado



Figure 2. Suitability Scenario selection form.
The What if? collaborative planning support system                                       397




    After selecting a scenario to create, review, or revise, the user is presented with the
Suitability Scenario Assumptions form shown in figure 3, As its name suggests, this
form is used to specify the assumptions which underlie a particular suitability scenario.
The label in the upper left corner of the form identifies the scenario which was selected
on the suitability selection form. The drop-down list box at the upper right allows the
user to select the land use for which a set of particular suitability assumptions are to be
specified. Thus, for example, in figure 3 the user is specifying the assumptions for the
'Low Density Residential' land use for the 'Rural Preservation* suitability scenario.




Figure 3. Suitability Scenario Assumptions form.

    As shown in figure 3, the suitability assumptions screen contains four tabbed sheets.
These sheets correspond to the four steps of the suitability analysis process: (1) identify-
ing the suitability factors; (2) specifying the suitability factor weights; (3) specifying
the suitability factor ratings; and (4) specifying the permissible land-use conversions.
These four steps are described briefly below.
    Identifying suitability factors The first sheet, labeled 'Factors Considered' and shown
in figure 3, contains a series of check boxes which are used to specify the factors which
the user feels should be considered in determining the suitability of different locations
for a particular land use. Thus, for example, in figure 3 the user has specified that all of
the suitability factors should be considered in determining the most suitable locations
for low-density residential development. The suitability factors included on the list are
determined by the available data for the study area and can include the full range of
natural features, for example, slopes, soils, and hazardous areas. Suitability factors
must be identified for each land use considered in the study. Different factors may be
selected for different land uses; for instance, soils may be assumed to be important for
locating retail and office establishments but not for locating single-family developments.
    Specifying factor weights The second sheet, labeled 'Factor Weights', contains a series
of text boxes that are used to specify the suitability factor weights, that is, the numerical
scores indicating the relative importance of different factors for determining the relative
398                                                                                                 R E Klosterman




suitability of different locations for a particular land use. Thus, for example, the Slope
factor could be given a factor weight of 2 and the Soils factor could be given a factor
weight of 1 to indicate that slope is considered to be twice as important as soils in
determining a site's suitability for a particular land use. Factor weights are assigned on
a five-point scale from 1 (low) to 5 (high).
     Specifying factor ratings The third sheet, labeled 'Factor Ratings', contains a series
of text boxes that are used to specify ratings for each factor type, that is, for each
category within a particular suitability factor (such as for each type of slope). Factor
ratings are numerical values which indicate the relative suitability of locations with a
particular factor type for a specified land use, for example, the suitability of locations
with different slopes for locating low-residential development. The factor types are rated
on a six-point scale from 5 (high) to 1 (low) and 0 (excluded). The 'excluded' category
identifies areas from which development is to be excluded, regardless of its suitability
with respect to other factors. Thus, for example, the user might specify that residential
development should be excluded from all locations with slopes which exceed 20%.
     Specifying land-use conversions The fourth suitability assumption sheet, labeled
'Conversion', contains a series of check boxes that are used to specify land uses that
may be converted from their current use (such as agriculture) to another use (such as
low-density residential) during the projection process. If no land uses are identified as
conversion candidates, only currently undeveloped land will be available for satisfying
the projected land-use demands.
     Suitability factors, factor scores, factor weights, and permitted land-use conversions
must be specified for all of the land uses considered in the analysis. After this information
is provided, the user can click on the Compute button on the suitability assumptions form
shown in figure 3. The model then computes the factor scores for each UAZ by multiplying
the user-specified factor weights by the corresponding user-defined factor rating and
summing these values. The resulting suitability scores indicate the relative suitability of
each UAZ for each land use when all of the suitability factors have been considered.
    The user can view the suitability analysis results by selecting the Suitability View Scena-
rio option from the main What if? form. The system generates a series of maps showing
the relative suitability of different locations for each land use, as shown in figure 4.



                                                  LandU*»   ) Low Density Residential       3   J




                                                       I*™- Medium Low                          !
                                                       f " ^tedium;                             I
                                                       f~ M u m High                    ^       1


                                                     '•••tea&kJ '-< Pefemt&fotg I               I




Figure 4. Suitability Analysis map.
    he What if"                       laborativr planning support system                                                               W)




 The maps can be viewed by selecting the desired land-use category from the drop-down
list and clicking on the Render Map button. The maps show each location's suitability
for each land use on a scale from 'Not Considered' and * Unsuitable1 to 'High'. The
system also generates two reports that can be read on the screen or sent to a printer.
The first report identifies the number of acres within each suitability class for all land
uses. The second report lists the assumptions which underlie a specified suitability
scenario, that is, the factors which were considered in the analysis, the user-specified
factor weights and rates, and the permissible land-use conversions.
Projecting hind-use demands
What if? considers the demand for land by converting the five main categories of land-
use residential, industrial, commercial, preservation, and locally oriented uses into
the equivalent future land-use demands. The demands are computed for up to five
periods, allowing the system to incorporate a staged development process in which
future development patterns are based on the previously existing patterns and antici-
pated infrastructure improvements.
    The process of projecting land-use demands begins by selecting the Growth option
from the main What if? program menu and by using the growth scenario selection form
to create, view, or revise a growth scenario. The form is identical in appearance and
function to the Suitability Scenario Selection form described previously. After choosing
a growth scenario to view, modify, or create, the user is presented with the Growth
Scenario Assumptions form shown in figure 5. The form has five subsidiary sheets
which are used to specify the assumptions which define the different land-use demands.
The procedures for specifying these assumptions, the growth scenario assumptions
forms, and the growth analysis outputs are described briefly below.

                                                                                   -^.-.^-..^^J^PP^J.
Rmw.                                          ::^^                 Tf^'^T^lf"                           ^WS^STT^
          7>flMf



                                                                                                              !'   SavoAl      |   I

                     wiohokit | Hound     I

                      nqiiunal HoujehoW*                                  .
                                                                                                              j,   Corrixjte   J   j
                                                                   loutthOW*
                       <? Trend                            1935    XOOOO                                      j,   foiKl'l     {
                       r   Htttftobtbto                    200
                                                               °   '#5460
                                                           2010    371500      ;
                       C low Piotwblo                      2020
                       C VfitjiLwPiobijb!')


                      Shaio of Regional Households
                                                       x
                       G Trend                >            Vear, Package
                       r, HighProbable                     1935    133
.           1;'                                                    14.8
                       C LoffRobafato                      f °
    < i                                                    2010
                                                           2020
                                                                   166                   -
                                                                   1|6




          Progress
                     '> U                 *       i!        .

Figure 5. Growth Scenario Assumptions form.

    Computing residential demand As shown in figure 5, the Residential sheet contains
two tabbed sheets. The first allows the user to select up to five independently prepared
projections for the total number of households in the region and the study area's share
of the regional households. These two values are multiplied to compute the projected
number of households in the study area in each projection period.
400                                                                                                                                                   R E Klosterman




    The second sheet is used to specify the assumptions about new residential
units including: (1) the breakdown by housing type for new residential construction;
(2) the housing density for each housing type; (3) the average household size for each
housing type; (4) the residential vacancy rates; and (5) the proportion of existing
housing units that will be lost to demolition, fire, and so on during each projection
period. The model uses the values specified on the two residential sheets to compute
the projected demand for residential land in each projection period.
    Computing regional business demand The next two sheets, labeled 'Industrial' and
'Commercial', are used to specify the assumptions which determine the projected
demand for regionally oriented land uses. As shown in figure 6, the Industrial sheet
allows the user to select between previously developed projections for the total regional
employment in each projection year. It also allows the user to specify: (1) the average
square footage of floor space per employee; (2) the industrial floor area ratio (FAR);
and (3) the vacancy rate for each industrial land use. The Commercial sheet provides
similar options for up to five different types of regional commercial development (for
example, regional retail, office, and mixed-use areas). These values are used to compute
the projected demand for industrial and commercial land uses in each projection year.


      Thmtt

      % Rissjferkiat'   Itidw&ial j Ctavngrcfei ] " F t e s s m t o ]    local



       •", Industrial Empk^mesni •"?"*• • •%-•- -, r;;;r, ',->;—,-?"•-,•
                                             "•;-,                                - „-'-,~,V„V~~    ••.';,';-—


          <?, Trend '
      ;
           THisb                                                                                                                     Cottiipute   I
          CMtddfe.
          C-\jm
                                                                                                                                                  J
                                                                                  - Employees
                                     Square Fed       Floor Atea        Vacaas?
          Ittksty                                                                   im             2Q0O          '2BUJ    2020
          Light Industrial                                                                                                10
          Heavy industrial              |?5             [if     :'       [o~~'
                                                                                    10             (8     •      lo
                                                                                   10        . 18          ,
                                                                                                                 4°      ,io.    /




   ' ftogressr




Figure 6. Industrial Growth Scenario Assumptions sheet.
     Computing preservation demand The Preservation sheet allows the user to specify
the amount of land which should be preserved for environmentally oriented uses such as
agriculture, forestry, and open space or environmental protection. The system permits
the user to specify the amount of land, either the number of acres or the percentage
of the study area, to be allocated for each preservation use in each projection year. These
values are treated as land-use demands along with the other land-use demands.
    Computing local demands The Local sheet allows the user to specify the quantity of
land that will be required per thousand persons to satisfy locally oriented land uses
whose location and size are dependent on the local (for example, municipal) popula-
tion. These uses include local parks and recreational areas, local retail (for example,
strip malls), and public and semipublic land uses. The specified land-use standards are
applied to the projected population in each political jurisdiction to compute the
amount of land which must be devoted to each use.
The What if? collaborative planning suppoit system                                                                           401




    After providing all the required information on the Growth Scenario Assumptions
form, the user can click on the Compute) button to calculate the projected demand
in each projection year for each land-use type, The system generates a report which
identifies the projected demand for each land use in each projection year and a second
report listing the assumed values that were used to compute these demands.
Allocating projected land-use demands
What if? projects future land-use patterns by allocating the projected land-use demands
derived from a user-selected growth scenario to different locations on the basis of their
relative suitability as defined by the assumptions of a user-selected suitability scenario.
For instance, the demand for residential land is assigned first to the most suitable sites,
then to the second most suitable sites, and so on until all of the projected residential
demand in a projection year has been satisfied. If desired, the growth allocation can be
controlled by user-selected land-use controls (land-use plans and zoning restrictions)
and infrastructure plans. The user is notified if not enough land is available to satisfy
the projected demand. If this occurs, the user must modify the suitability, growth, or
allocation scenario assumptions (for example, relax the land suitability requirements,
allow more land uses to be converted to other uses, or increase development densities)
to make them consistent.
    The growth allocation process begins by using the allocation scenario selection
form to create a new allocation scenario or to revise or delete an existing one. The
form is similar in appearance and function to the suitability and growth scenario forms
except that it requires the user to identify the suitability and growth scenarios which
correspond to a given allocation scenario. The user is then presented with the Alloca-
tion Scenario Assumptions form shown in figure 7. The form contains four tabbed
sheets which are used to specify the assumptions which underlie a growth allocation
scenario, as described briefly below. The first 'Allocation Priority' sheet shown in
figure 7, is used to specify the order in which the various projected land-use demands
will be satisfied.


     Tfond

     •' Afocation Priory | Inlrasiructuft j t ^ U t e Controls | LIA2 Control* 1

          Drag and drop label* lo desiied allocation ordef                                 p Prompt when out of land


     ^    1 Open Spaco/Envtrofwmt Protect                       10 U$]ht Indmlrta!

     j|   2 Agriculture t                                       11 Heavy Industrial

     1    3 Rural Residential

 > -',    4 >SF-Very low Density -                              '       -        ^'    ^                           '
                                                                                                                       \hV
     ')   5 SF" Low Denstty                   '                        , %                               -'

     -* - 6 SF« Medium Density           *         -                                         - -

     *    ? Mu»i-Famfy                   --                ''                "                     - , - . ' -

 ,   \    a-awte        -            ,        '*                -s *                  < '      \      > '
     ;-   9 Fte*al*Begtonal                            '                                              = .




Figure 7. Allocation Scenario Assumptions form.
402                                                                                        R E Klosterman




    Infrastructure sheet As shown in figure 8, the 'Infrastructure' sheet contains two
tabbed sheets. The Infrastructure Plans' sheet is used to select previously defined infra-
structure plans which will be used to guide the allocation process. If no infrastructure
plans are selected, all of the land uses will be located in their most suitable locations,
regardless of the availability of sewer and water service or their proximity to major
roads or intersections.


      Tmttd


                                                                            SaveAi


              r- S ewet Expansion                                  j .   ,S«veSc«r«air*o

                 j Existing[Sewer Plan                     £J
                                                                            Compute

                                                       :                     Cancel - j
              r'Water Service Eapamkm—

                 j   <   n   o   n     e   >       "   ^   1
                                                                              h'dp


              r Roads ~~x                  ;                   r

                 [Existing Road Plan                       ^J



              r- Intersection*                 •

                jExisting Intersections                    >]




Figure 8. Infrastructure Plans sheet.
    The 'Infrastructure Required' sheet is used to specify the assumed relationship
between infrastructure provision (or proximity) and land-use development patterns.
The sheet lists the land uses to be allocated; each land use is associated with drop-
down boxes for each of the infrastructure controls listed on the Infrastructure Plans
sheet. The drop-down boxes can be used to specify one of three options.
    The first option, Not Affected, is used for land uses whose location is assumed not
to be affected by the availability of (or proximity to) a given type of infrastructure.
Thus, for instance, one might assume that the location of large-lot residential units is
not affected by the availability of sewers because these units could be served by septic
systems. In these cases, the projected land-use demands will be located in the most
desirable locations, regardless of the presence of this infrastructure.
    The second option, Required, is used to identify land uses which are assumed to
require—or be near to—a particular type of infrastructure. Thus, for example, one
could assume that Office and Neighborhood Retail uses require water and sewer
service and Regional Retail uses must be located near major intersections. In these
cases, the specified land-use demand will be allocated only to areas that have (or are
near to) the specified infrastructure.
    The third option, Excluded, is used to identify land uses that are assumed to be
excluded from areas that are served by (or are near to) a particular type of infra-
structure. Thus, for example, one could assume that agriculture would be excluded
from areas that are served by water and sewer or are near major intersections because
these locations will be too expensive to be devoted to agricultural uses. In these cases,
future land-use demands will be excluded from areas that are served by, or are near to,
the What if'7 collaborative planning support system                                   M)]




a particular type of infrastructure. The final sheet, labelled *UAZ Controls', contains a
scries of text boxes that are used to specify the minimum-sized UAZs into which
different land-use demands can be allocated, for example, that industrial development
cannot take place in UAZs smaller than, say, five acres in size.
     Lund Use Controls sheet This sheet is similar to the Infrastructure Plans sheet shown
in figure <S and allows the user to select between previously defined land-use plans and
zoning ordinances which will control the location of future growth. If a land-use control
ordinance or plan is selected, the system allows projected land-use demands to be
allocated only to areas in which the land use is permitted or planned. If no land-use
control plan is selected, land-use demands will be allocated to their most suitable
location, without any restrictions.
     When the user clicks on the Compute button the system projects future land-use
patterns by allocating the projected land-use demands to the most suitable sites,
subject to any land-use controls or infrastructure plans selected by the user. The
resulting land-use projections for each projection year can then be viewed in map or
report form.
     For example, figure 9 shows the projected land-use patterns for a 'Compact Alloca-
tion1 scenario whose user-specified suitability ratings and allocation controls have
concentrated future residential and commercial development largely in the eastern
part of the study area. Figure 10 (over) shows the projected land-use patterns for a
'Dispersed Allocation' scenario which incorporates the same land-use demand assump-
tions and different infrastructure and land-use control assumptions which allow devel-
opment to be spread throughout the study area. These two examples illustrate the
power of tools such as What if? for graphically portraying the implications of alter-
native policy choices. The system also generates reports which record the projected
land-use quantities for the study area and each political subdivision in each projection
year and the assumptions which underlie a scenario.


ill J9J »1<X|O:IO|                               CompactA/fanettton




Figure 9. Allocation map for 'Compact Allocation' scenario.
404                                                                      R E Klosterman




Figure 10. Allocation map for 'Dispersed Allocation' scenario.

Installing What if?
Although it incorporates many of the concepts of other GIS-based models such as the
first California Urban Futures Model (Landis, 1994; 1995) What if? is unique in its abil-
ity to be adapted to the GIS data sets and policy concerns for one or more study areas.
These capabilities are provided by its GIS-created UAZ files, Setup, and Manager
programs which are described briefly below.
Creating UAZ files
Before What if? is used, the UAZs for a particular study area must be created with
standard GIS overlay functions. The UAZs are created by combining GIS layers
containing information on, among other things, natural conditions, existing and
proposed infrastructure, land-use controls, and the boundaries for subdivisions of the
study area. GIS UNION commands are used to combine these layers into a single layer
made up of UAZs containing information from each of the constituent layers. That
is, each UAZ contains information on the natural features, available infrastructure,
planned land use, and so on for all points lying inside of it. The UAZs are stored in
ESRFs 'shape file' format and incorporated directly into the What if? program.
    The only GIS layer that is absolutely essential for using What if? is the existing
land uses. A variety of additional layers can be added, depending on the available GIS
data, the user's analysis and policy needs, and the requirements of any secondary
applications that will utilize the What if? outputs. In most cases it is desirable to
have at least three natural layers for the suitability analysis, two or three land-use
control and infrastructure layers, and some basic boundary display layers.
Setup program
The What if? Setup program creates the system files that customize the software for a
particular collection of GIS (and non-GIS) data. As shown in figure 11, the main Setup
form contains a series of options that are used to define the land-use categories,
suitability factors, and factor types that will be used in the analysis and the labels
and the other information that appears on the suitability, growth, and allocation
scenario assumption forms.
The What if collaborative planning support system                                                                  40S




    The user can enter the required information by clicking on one of the buttons
displayed along the left-hand side of the main Setup form, For example, clicking on
the Define Factors button displays the form shown in figure 12. This form specifies
the labels for the suitability factors that will be used in a particular analysis, as
determined by the CHS data that are available for the study area. Similar forms
define the land uses in the study and the labels that appear on the suitability, growth,
and allocation forms. After entering all of the required data, the user can select the
'Create System Files'option at the bottom of the form to create a set of customized
scenario assumption forms containing the labels defined by the user. These forms
can then be used to create the suitability, growth, and allocation scenarios as
described previously.


ilpg                                                          PolHilf                               "HO!!!!
liii        ——*«—                                             1
                                                                  COHJIWI     Nam**

                                                                  Factor t    jsiopos
       Ctanatot Information                           1
1V        EJ Define Suftafa% Land Use Categories      1           Factor 2    [Soils
          13 Define Ewstfng Land Us© Categories         j
          GE3 0efine Allocation Land U w Categories    1
                                                                  Factor 3    [lOOyr Flood plain
          ( 3 Define Rawed Land Use Categories        1

1: V      d    Map ELUslo ALUs                        1           Factor 4    [Flooding Potential
          (3   MapALUstoSLUs                          1
          ©    MapALUstoELUs                          j           Factor 5    [Endangered Species
          Q    MapALUstoPLUs                          I

          (3   Define Projection Periods               j          Factor 6    [Stream Buffer
;i V
       Suitability Information                        1       >   Factor 7
         ( 3 Define Factors                           j                       I                     • •• -   ' j
         ( 3 Define Factor Typos                      1
                                                                  Factor 8
       Growth Information                             ||
                                                                              I
  V      ( 3 Define Sub-Areas                          |          Factor 9
                                                                              I
          (3   Define Residential Information         1
                                                                  Factor 10
          (3
          (3
               Define Commercial Information
               Define Industrial Information
                                                      1
                                                      1
                                                                              I. .
       Allocation Information                         J]                                Cancel       OK
          ( 3 Define Infrastructure Types              [
          ( 3 Define Infrastructure Controls           |
          Q Define Land Use Controls                    |
                                                              Figure 12. Define Factors form.
        Completed                                     j
         ( 3 Create System Files                          |


Figure 11. What if? Setup form.

Manager program
The What if? Manager program can be used to revise or delete a set of scenario
assumption forms once they have been created. It allows the user to modify the labels
that appear on the scenario assumptions forms (to, for instance, correct any spelling
errors), modify the names used to identify different land-use categories, or change
system-defined variables such as the household and employment projections. These
corrections can be made after the forms have been used to create a set of scenario
assumptions.

Evaluation
What if? has many obvious strengths, many of which are equally obvious weaknesses.
Its biggest advantage is that it is a fully operational model which can be adapted to the
particular data sets and policy concerns in any area which satisfies the rather modest
406                                                                       R E Klosterman




data requirements of the model. These requirements include: (1) a required GIS layer
containing current land uses; (2) optional layers describing natural features, adminis-
trative boundaries, and land-use and infrastructure plans; and (3) projected, or
assumed, values for the region's projected population and employment, household
and employment densities, and the like. These data requirements are particularly
modest in comparison with those of other operational urban models such as
DRAM/EMPAL (Putman, 1983; 1992), MEPLAN (Echenique et al, 1990), the CUF
models (Landis, 1994; Landis and Zhang, 1998), and UrbanSim (Waddell, 1998).
     A second obvious advantage is the simple and intuitive modeling structure of
What if? The general concepts of balancing the supply of, and demand for, land by
determining the relative suitability of different locations, projecting the demand for
land, and allocating the projected demands to the most suitable locations is easily
understood by elected officials and the public. The detailed computations required to
carry out these three stages are of course too complex for most users to understand
fully. However, the underlying structure of the model is much easier to understand than
the other, much more complex urban models listed above.
     What if? shares many of the advantages (and disadvantages) of the CUF model on
which it is based (Landis, 1994, pages 400-402, 418-419; 1995, page 444). Like the
CUF model—and unlike other operational urban models—What if? is GIS based.
This allows the model to take advantage of the diversity of spatially referenced data
which are available in a particular study area and grow as more data become available.
The use of spatially disaggregated GIS data also allows the model to allocate land-use
demands to particular sites and not to spatial aggregates such as census tracts or traffic
analysis zones. Again, like the CUF model, What if? is policy oriented and simulates
alternative development patterns as determined by local land development policies.
Unlike traditional urban models, the critical variables which determine different model
outcomes are local land development policies, not abstract 'secondhand' effects of these
policies such as changes in travel times or accessibility.
     The simple structure and minimal data requirements of What if? are associated
directly with its most glaring weakness, its lack of a firm theoretical basis. The model
does not include measures of spatial interaction, that is, accessibility to employment,
shopping, and recreational opportunities which are widely recognized to be an impor-
tant—if not the most important—determinant of long-term urban growth patterns and
the key component of most urban models. Unlike the acknowledged 'state of the art' in
urban models (Wegener, 1995, page 22) it does not rely on random utility or discrete
choice theory to explain and predict the behavior of urban actors such as households,
investors, and firms. It also does not represent the interlinked markets for land,
housing, nonresidential uses, labor, and infrastructure, or provide any procedures for
'market clearing' and price adjustment in the face of changes in demand and/or supply.
In addition What if? also does not explicitly model the behavior of actors such as
households, businesses, and developers in the same way as 'object-oriented' models such
as UrbanSim (Waddell, 1998).
     Instead of incorporating any of these theoretically appealing, but complex, concepts,
What if? has been designed to provide a plausible, intuitive, and adaptable fully
operational model of the urban development process. The behaviors of urban markets
and actors are represented implicitly in the assumption that land uses will be allocated
to their most suitable location, as determined by a set of user-specified suitability
assumptions. Similarly, the impact of alternative growth management policies is incor-
porated into the model as an assumption that development will occur only in places
where it is permitted under a zoning ordinance or anticipated in a land-use plan.
Neither assumption begins to capture the complexities of actual urban development
The What i f collaborative planning support system                                             40?




processes. However, they dn provide a readily understandable and plausible basis for
considering the implications of alternative public policies. The overarching goal, after
all, is not projecting the future exactly but providing a meaningful foundation for
community dialogue and debate.
     The ideal PSS will provide an "intelligent digital toolbox" that helps users select the
most appropriate software tools from a range of alternative analysis and forecasting
models, applies these tools to data which have been accessed locally or via the Internet,
and allows users to view quickly the implications o( alternative policy choices
in intuitive graphic, map, and interactive video and/or sound displays (Klosterman,
1997, page 52). What if? is only one of a number of systems that are being developed
to help achieve this ideal (Klosterman, 1999). However, it is unique in providing a
readily available package that is easy to use and understand, fully customizable to a
community's existing CHS data set, and incorporates the suitability, growth, and alloca-
tion portions of the planning process. As a result, it may provide a useful component
of a more comprehensive PSS which considers a wide range of land-use-related issues
such as the fiscal, transportation, and environmental impacts of" alternative growth
scenarios.
Acknowledgements. The What i f PSS was designed jointly by a number o\' people including,
most importantly, Hric Swanson, formerly an employee of Data Chromatics Inc., and llri Avin
and Jane Dembner of LDR International. The original programming was done by Hric Swanson;
the programming is currently being done by Kevin Butler. The author also acknowledges the
comments of two anonymous reviewers which stimulated substantial improvements to the earlier
version oi' this paper.
References
Couclelis II, 1991, "Geographically informed planning: requirements for planning-relevant GIS"
    Papers in Regional Science 70 9 20
DavidoffP, 1965, "Advocacy and pluralism in pkinrimg" Journal of the American Institute of Planners
    32 331 337
Echenique M H, Flowerdew A D, Hunt J D, MayoT R, Skidmore I J, Simmonds D C, 1990,
    "The MEPLAN models oi' Bilbao, Leeds, and Dortmund" Transport Reviews 10 309 322
Finaly P N, Marples C, 1992, "Strategic group decision support systems: a guide for the unwary"
    Long Range Planning 25 98 107
Godschalk D R, Parham D, Porter D, Potapchuk W R, Schulkraft S, 1994 Pulling Together:
    A Land Use and Development Consensus Manual The Urban Institute, 2100 M Street NW,
    Washington, DC 20037
Harris B, 1989,"Beyond geographic information systems: computers and the planning professional"
    Journal of the American Planning Association 55 85 92
Harris B, Batty M, 1993, "Locational models, geographical information, and planning support
    systems" Journal of Planning Education and Research 12 184 198
Healey P, 1992, "Planning through debate: the communicative turn in planning theory" Town
    Planning Review 63 143 162
Holmberg S C, 1994, "Geoinformatics for urban and regional planning" Environment and
    Planning B: Planning and Design 21 5 - 19
Hopkins L D, 1977, "Methods of land suitability analysis" Journal of the American Institute of
    Planners 43 386-400
Innes J E, 1992, "Group processes and the social construction of growth management: Florida,
    Vermont and New Jersey" Journal of the American Planning Association 58 440-453
Innes J E, 1996, "Planning through consensus building: a new view of the comprehensive planning
    ideal" Journal of the American Planning Association 62 460-472
Klosterman R E, 1987, "Politics of computer-aided planning" Town Planning Review 58 441 -452
Klosterman R E, 1997, "Planning support systems: a new perspective on computer-aided planning"
    Journal of Planning Education and Research 17 45 - 54
Klosterman R E (Ed.), 1999 Theme issue: New perspectives on planning support systems. Environment
    and Planning B: Planning and Design 26 317-408
Landis J D, 1994, "The California Urban Futures Model: a new generation of metropolitan
    simulation models" Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design 21 399 - 420
408                                                                            R E Klosterman




Landis J D, 1995, "Imagining land use futures: applying the California Urban Futures Model"
    Journal of the American Planning Association 61438-457
Landis J, Zhang M, 1998, "The second generation of the California Urban Futures Model. Part 1:
    Model logic and theory" Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design 25 657 - 666
Lowry K, Adler P, Milner N, 1997, "Participating the public: group processes, politics, and the
    public" Journal of Planning Education and Research 16 177 -187
McHarg 1,1969 Design with Nature (Natural History Press, Garden City, NJ)
Putman S H, 1983 Integrated Urban Models: Analysis of Transportation and Land Use (Pion, London)
Putman S H, 1992 Integrated Urban Models 2: New Research and Applications of Optimization
    and Dynamics (Pion, London)
San Diego Association of Governments, 1994, "Technical Description. Series 8 regional growth
    forecasts: subregional allocation", San Diego Association of Governments, 401 B Street,
    Suite 800, San Diego, CA 92101
Waddell P, 1998, "Simulating the effects of metropolitan growth management strategies",
   Association of the Collegiate Schools of Planning, Pasadena, CA, November
Wegener M, 1995, "Current and future land use models", in Travel Model Improvement Program
   Land Use Modeling Conference Proceedings (US Department of Transportation, Washington,
    DC) pp 15-40




p                                             © 1999 a Pion publication printed in Great Britain
