[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: journal/M18-allmendinger-haughton-2009-soft-spaces-fuzzy-boundaries-and-metagovernance-the-new-spatial-planning-in-the-thames-gateway-10.1068-a40208.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Title:           a40208 617..633
Creator:         3B2 Total Publishing 6.05d/W
Producer:        Acrobat Distiller 3.01 for Windows
CreationDate:    Thu Feb 19 02:16:39 2009 WIB
ModDate:         Thu Feb 19 18:59:10 2009 WIB
Custom Metadata: no
Metadata Stream: yes
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            none
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           18
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       420.8 x 686 pts
Page rot:        0
File size:       173778 bytes
Optimized:       no
PDF version:     1.4
[Extracted Text]
Environment and Planning A 2009, volume 41, pages 617 ^ 633


doi:10.1068/a40208


Soft spaces, fuzzy boundaries, and metagovernance:
the new spatial planning in the Thames Gateway

Phil Allmendinger
Centre for Planning Studies, Land Economy, University of Reading, Reading RG6 6AW,
England; e-mail: p.allmendinger@reading.ac.uk
Graham Haughtonô
Department of Geography, University of Hull, Hull HU6 7RX, England;
e-mail: g.f.haughton@hull.ac.uk
Received 23 August 2007; in revised form 17 December 2007; published online 3 December 2008



Abstract. This paper examines the changing practices of spatial planning, critically engaging with state
theory to argue that a new generation of `soft spaces' and `fuzzy boundaries' occupies a key position
in the emergent planning system. In the process we question whether privileged scales and sectors can
meaningfully be identified in current state-restructuring processes. We use interviews with key national
policy makers and a case study of the Thames Gateway to test our ideas.

1 Introduction
The Thames Gateway area is currently the largest and most ambitious regeneration
project in the UK, with plans to provide an extra 225 000 new jobs and 160 000 new
homes by 2016, accommodating around 350 000 extra residents, plus all the infrastruc-
ture required for the resulting massive increase in residential and working population
(DCLG, 2007; HoC, 2007). As well as the country's largest regeneration challenge,
it is also arguably its most demanding contemporary governance challenge. Thames
Gateway lies to the east of London, on both banks of the river Thames, and as
yet shares its boundaries with no other statutory body. There is, however, a Thames
Gateway Strategy team within the Department for Communities and Local Government
(DCLG), (1) charged with providing leadership, integrating the work of various central
government departments, and direct intervention with partners when necessary (NAO,
2007, page 14). The Thames Gateway Strategic Partnership involves stakeholders from
across the area and certain government agencies, and is chaired by the Minister of
Housing and Planning. The Gateway also has within it a range of new subareas, few
if any conterminous with existing political or functional boundaries. To begin to hint
at the scale of the resulting complexity, consider first that the area takes in parts
of three different standard government regions, involving three sets of Regional Spatial
Strategies (RSSs) and Regional Economic Strategies, transport, housing strategies, and
more. Consider then that within the Thames Gateway itself there are three subregional
partnerships: Thames Gateway London, Thames Gateway South Essex, and Thames
Gateway Kent Partnership. Then there is the network of local delivery partners, with
varying governance styles, including two urban development corporations (UDCs), one
urban regeneration company, and six other local partnerships. There is also the Olympic
Delivery Authority, responsible for the Olympic Park. Consider next the sixteen local
authorities which are wholly or in part within the Gateway, each with its own planning,

(1) The government planning ministry at the start of this work was the Office of the Deputy Prime

Minister (ODPM), changing to the Department of Communities and Local Government in 2006.

ô Corresponding author.
618                                                                P Allmendinger, G Haughton




housing, regeneration, recreation, education, and transport plans. Then there are the
essential services to consider: police, health, and fire authorities, plus water, gas,
electricity, telecommunications, environmental protection, flood management, sewer-
age, and so forth. Consider further the vast scale of the plans and their importance to
the health of the economy of both London and the country more generally. Add to this
pot the legacy of the former London Docklands Development Corporation, which
whilst it achieved much in regeneration terms, left a legacy of ill feeling over its
governance arrangements.
    It is in this context that we focus here on the emerging governance arrangements
for the Thames Gateway, which are interesting as an example of what we might refer to
as `metagovernance', or the `governance of governance' (Jessop, 2004). As we have
already intimated, this is not so much a subregion, as is implied by the formal planning
guidance for the Thames Gateway published in 1995, but a metaregion which is of vital
interest to the national economy (ODPM, 2004). In this paper we discuss how these
governance arrangements are unfolding, with a particular emphasis on the role of
spatial strategies. In particular, we want to argue that there is an intriguing usage
of strategic and delivery interventions at scales other than those of the statutory
planning system (local and regional), as planning activities necessarily learn to work
within complex multilayered, fluid, and sometimes fuzzy scales of policy and gover-
nance arrangements. Added to this, planners are also having to rethink how they can
most productively work with actors from various sectors at all scales. The clear geo-
graphical and professional boundaries of planning, plus the hierarchical and silo ways
of behaving are already planning history. We do not have a single new model which
has replaced this; rather a series of experiments about how planning operates within
constantly evolving governance systems for place making at all scales.(2)

2 The changing nature of planning and governance
Land-use planning has been undergoing significant change over the past decade or so,
not least to make the system more strategic, faster, and with more effective ways of
engaging with all sections of society (Allmendinger, 2006; Allmendinger and Tewdwr-
Jones, 2006). In particular, much has been made of the rescaling of planning functions
through the reintroduction of a regional level planning in the form of RSSs (Haughton
and Counsell, 2004; Keating, 1997; Vigar et al, 2000). One way of seeking to under-
stand this is through the insights generated from state theory, particularly recent
debates on the rollout of neoliberal policy and the role of state rescaling as part of
this. In some accounts this involves a `hollowing-out' of certain functions of the nation-
state and as part of this a reshaping of local, regional, and international governance
arrangements has been taking place. Following from this, it has been argued persuasively
that we are experiencing an era of newly emergent `spatiotemporal fixes' (Jessop, 2000,
pages 334 ^ 335), driven by evolving forms of neoliberal governance which seek to
privilege competitiveness through the subordination of social policy to economic policy,
new forms of partnership and networks, and the promotion of the regional level as the
most appropriate level of intervention.
    These processes have led to debates concerning scalar and territorial relativisa-
tion and the disruption and undermining of existing nested relations of scale at national
and local levels (Jessop, 2000, page 343; see also Brenner, 1999). Such work has been

(2) This paper draws on 133 interviews as part of a 2.5 year project, involving interviews with 45

national policy figures, 18 people with specific mandates for strategy and policy delivery in the
Thames Gateway areas, plus a workshop in 2007 involving 11 people. All quotes are from
interviews undertaken in 2006 unless otherwise stated.
The new spatial planning in the Thames Gateway                                         619




influential in critically examining processes of multiscalar governance, with interesting
debates about the meaning of terms such as the `hollowing-out' of the nation-state.
As Jessop and others have been at pains to point out, the shifting of powers and
responsibilities across scales does not of itself imply any diminution of state power.
Rather, the privileging of new scales of governance can be seen as part of a strategic
process orchestrated by the state. It is in this context that Goodwin et al (2005) talk
about devolution as part of the `filling-in' of the state as new scales of governance are
either created or privileged in some particular way.
     Contemporary rescaling processes can also be seen as part of a wider reworking
of the existence and intensity of networked relations between scales and places:
   ``Places now can be seen as the embodiment of virtual or immanent forces, and as
     the temporary spatiotemporalisation of associational networks of different length
     and duration'' (Amin, 2002, page 391).
Such a view highlights the need to explore the ways in which policy processes develop
and how policy actors seek to communicate, debate, and work together more effectively
not simply within a given policy sector but across sectors and across scales.
     Spatial rescaling has not been accepted uncritically either theoretically or in the
light of empirical evidence, with Raco (2005a) in particular highlighting the tendency
to create a `straw man' of rolled out neoliberalism within much regulationist work.
Nevertheless, there are important rescaling processes at work, most evident in the way
state rescaling is evolving differently in different parts of the UK as part of the post-
1997 devolution reforms. For planning, the result is some major asymmetries emerging
across the UK, involving different mixtures of `national', `regional' and `subregional',
and local planning processes. But we want to argue here that a large part of this
rescaling process involves not simply a shifting of emphasis across the existing scales
of the statutory planning system, but the insertion of new scales for planning inter-
vention, plus an apparent predilection for promoting new policy scales, initially at least
through the device of fuzzy boundaries. Examples of such fuzzy boundaries include
those used for `regions' in the Wales Spatial Strategy and also the city-regions proposed
in the Northern Way, itself a new form of metaregional governance arrangement
covering three standard regions (Counsell and Haughton, 2006). There is also an
emergent resort to new multiarea subregions for strategy making and policy delivery,
evident at various scales of regeneration, planning, and other domains, breaking away
from the rigidities associated with the formal scales of statutory plan-making. The
emergence of these `soft spaces' is an important trend, which alongside the tactical
use of `fuzzy boundaries' is related to a policy impetus to break away from the shackles
of preexisting working patterns which might be variously held to be slow, bureaucratic,
or not reflecting the real geographies of problems and opportunities.
     So whilst planning still needs its clear legal `fix' around set boundaries for formal
plans, if it is to reflect the more complex relational world of associational relationships
which stretch across a range of geographies, planning also needs to operate through
other spaces, and it is these we think of as `soft spaces'. The argument here is not that
planners are shifting from one set of spaces to another, but rather that they are
learning to acknowledge that they must work within multiple spaces, and as part of
this adapting to and even adopting the tactics of soft spaces and fuzzy boundaries
where these help deliver the objectives of planning. There is a strong element of
pragmatism involved in the emergence of soft spaces and use of fuzzy boundaries,
echoing the New Labour emphasis on getting things done and not worrying too
much about tidiness around the edges or administrative clutter. The resulting relational
geography of planning requires attention to a variety of associational networks work-
ing across a wide mix of administrative/political spaces, `soft' spaces, and other scales.
620                                                          P Allmendinger, G Haughton




    A further significant and related change to planning is the shift from, broadly,
regulatory planning to `spatial planning'. While definitions of what constitutes spatial
planning are diverse and not always illuminating (echoing the multiple interpretations
of similar notions of sustainable development and sustainable communities) there is
a broad agreement that it involves a focus upon the qualities and management of
space and place (RTPI, 2001). With their clear focus on localities, planners arguably
have a key role to play in bringing a clearer spatial dimension to the integration of a
wide variety of policy sectors, such as economic development, health and education,
and transport, and the way they interact and play out differently in different places
(Kidd, 2007). Part of the focus of spatial planning involves better vertical and
horizontal policy integration of processes that are diffuse, fluid, and multidirectional,
rather than rigid, hierarchical, and unilinear. Consequently, spatial planning is a
contributor to and a reflection of a more fundamental reform of territorial manage-
ment that aims to improve integration of different forms of spatial development
activity (Allmendinger and Tewdwr-Jones, 2006). More than this, however, the way
in which spatial planning has been adopted in the UK reflects the wider context
of the ascendancy of neoliberalist politics, being shaped and deployed in pursuit of
a particular approach to bolstering growth in the southeast of the country, to ensure
the national growth project is not harmed. Multiscalar, multiagency, and cross-
sectoral integration opens up alternative routes to pursuing a prodevelopment
agenda where local forces coalesce to seek to resist development.
    This begins to hint at the importance of planning's role in `joining up' other
strategies as a part of the process of metagovernance: that is, the process by which
the rules of subnational governance are centrally steered. Adding further complexity to
such tensions, central government planners have also had to have regard to various
European initiatives and directives, from the European Spatial Development Perspec-
tive to Strategic Environmental Assessment. And given the commitment to empower
subnational and regional planning bodies, there is now a widening base of planning
practice at lower levels within the system which have to be variously nurtured, reined
in, and learnt from. So for instance, there is no national spatial plan for the UK nor
for England, though there are statutory Regional Spatial Strategies (RSSs), currently
going through the process of approval. Each RSS is issued in formal terms by central
government, except the London Plan which is published by the mayor.
    Unlike the previous system of Regional Planning Guidance, RSSs have a statutory
role, and are expected to be more `spatial' in their content, have much improved
consultative processes, and have adopted a wider focus than simply `land-use' issues,
as part of the government's commitment to the new spatial planning. The result is
an interesting position for agreed spatial strategies, full of tensions and potential
contradictions. They have gone through various forms of consultation and a formal
examination in public and report by an independent panel. So they bear a resemblance
to governance in the wide-ranging processes of consultation involved, but ultimately
they become adopted as part of the formal regulatory apparatus of the state, which
other bodies must have regard to. The full consequences of this are yet to emerge.
But what we are seeing here is planning being used to develop conjointly with other
sectoral actors a form of `spatial strategy', through which the government is forcing
through an integrated policy-making process. The result is that, at all levels, an
increasingly wide range of bodies and institutions are being drawn into the planning
apparatus to varying degrees: substantially in the case of economic development,
transport, and environmental regulators, increasingly so in the case of energy and water
providers, and very unevenly in the case of social infrastructure, such as education and
health sectors.
The new spatial planning in the Thames Gateway                                           621




    It is important not to overread this process. Large aspects of planning remain
at heart a land-use regulatory function, but its boundaries are increasingly open,
as it necessarily learns how to work with others, who bring new expertise, resources,
priorities, and insights. In other sectors too, not least economic development, wide-
spread stakeholder consultation is being required for the new strategies. Central
government is creating the new rules requiring organisations to work together in new
ways, and it is also seeking to influence their content. The government appears to be
creating a range of coordinating mechanisms at various spatial scales, within which
planning is centrally embedded. More than this, however, we are seeing the rescaling
of metagovernance, a process which locks in actors at and across a range of scales.
This is evident not only at the level of the nation-state, but through the work of various
international agreements and also, we would argue, in how regional networks of actors
are now expected to work. We are not suggesting here that these metagovernance
arrangements necessarily work in a unified, unidirectional, coherent, or functional
way in support of capital or a specific state project. There is an important element of
struggle, negotiation, and contingency about how such arrangements operate which
must be explored historically ^ empirically(3)
    There is something profound going on here. At one level, planning remains a part
of the formal regulatory apparatus of the state and could be seen as rigidly hierarch-
ical, a classic case of `government', where we can see continuing centralisation, and the
continued dominance of experts, professions, and professionals in policy development
and decision making (Allmendinger, 2006). But when we look beyond this, we can see
how spatial planning is also being reconstituted so that it can and must operate within
new associational networks, becoming deeply embedded in governance systems at
all levels. So planning is somehow both an expression of old-style `government' and
new-style `governance', an intriguing hybrid.
    These three components of the new planning (the rescaling of its functions, its
spatial nature, and the focus upon coordination, integration, and inclusion) all raise
significant issues and possibilities. First, the `horizontal reworking' of the state has
been largely overlooked in the literature which has focused, instead, on more vertical
relations (Allmendinger and Haughton, 2007). Castells (1977) and Harvey (1989) both
argue for the importance of recognising and distinguishing between the scope of a
territorial structure (that is, the range of different sectors and interests involved) and
the scale, that is the geographical coverage, of a territorial structure. In particular,
we would argue that it is important to consider how state rescaling processes intersect
with state-inspired initiatives to disrupt the processes of setting up professional/technical
or scientific boundaries and ways of engaging with each other and the state. So moving
away from hierarchical systems which work within narrow policy silos, we can see a
more relational form of governance emerging, where governments seek to diffuse power
in various ways, horizontally and vertically.
    Second, the notion of spatial planning is a broad discourse that has a variety of
meanings and possibilities for actors, processes, and outcomes. We see this as requiring
not so much a fundamental restructuring of the planning profession as a reworking of
the boundaries of the planning profession. At one level, this is nothing new (Wildavsky,
1973). So, rather than see a unilinear path from rigidly policed professional boundaries
to more porous boundaries, we see the reshaping of planning as an on-going process
rooted in the broader political economy of territorial management practices. The
contemporary challenge is not for planners to be able to claim expertise in each
thematic area a plan might need to engage with, but rather to work productively

(3) We are grateful for a referee's comments on this.
622                                                              P Allmendinger, G Haughton




with other professionals and equally importantly, with various bodies representing
different aspects of the general public, lobby groups, interest groups, and so forth.
And this is a two-way processöincreasingly other professional disciplines are having
to work more closely with planners, adding in a stronger spatial dimension to their
own strategic processes.
    Third, the normative and analytical use of governance and policy integration mask
new, contested landscapes of whom and what are being integrated (Healey, 2006).
Integration inevitably opens up new networks and opportunities but is not infinite:
it has to be created and established as a political process. The very process itself will
inevitably privilege some relationships over others, opening up new avenues and closing
off others.
    In the remainder of this paper we seek to analyse these issues using the Thames
Gateway as a case study.

3 The Thames Gateway
The evolving nature of governance, planning, and regeneration in the Thames Gateway
provides a rich environment for study from a variety of perspectives (see John et al,
2005; Raco, 2005a; 2005b). Here we explore three issues that arise from the debates and
discussion around the `new planning': rescaling, spatial planning and integration,
and spatial planning and delivery.
    To say that the institutional and policy context of the Thames Gateway is compli-
cated would be an understatement. The Thames Gateway idea has been around since
the 1980s, recognising the potential to provide much needed new housing for the
southeast of England in an area with considerable industrial dereliction and relative
urban deprivation. However, the current stimulus for greater action comes from the
area's designation as one of four national growth areas in 2003, with further impetus
added by the successful London Olympics bid for 2012, with the Olympic Village
located in the Gateway area.
    While the principles of spatial planning in the Gateway were first set out in
Regional Planning Guidance 9a (DoE, 1995) it was not until the publication of the
Government's Sustainable Communities Action Plan in 2003 and regional commenta-
ries (ODPM, 2003a), establishing Thames Gateway as the largest of four new national
growth areas, that momentum really began to build. At this stage the government set
a target for 120 000 new homes to be built in the area by 2016 along with the creation
of 180 000 new jobs.
    In 2005 the government announced its intention to produce a Strategic Framework
for the Thames Gateway by November 2006 which would be linked to the Comprehensive
Spending Review in 2007. In the meantime it published Creating Sustainable Communities:
Delivering in the Thames Gateway in March 2005 (ODPM, 2005). This document reported
progress on the Sustainable Communities Plan and updated information on priorities
and objectives. Recognising the national strategic importance of the Thames Gateway
in particular, there was considerable fanfare for the fact that the prime minister would
chair a committee of cabinet ministers to ensure it achieved high priority. It is not
entirely clear if it ever met more than once or if it is still functioning. Reflecting in part
a high turnover of ministers in office, in various documents different government
ministers are said to be chairing a committee to oversee the Thames Gateway, and
in 2006 the appointment of a Thames Gateway `Czar' attracted further media coverage.
There has also been a team of central government civil servants overseeing the Gateway
for some time.
    One of the intriguing announcements in the Sustainable Communities Action Plan
was the decision to use UDCs to help in its delivery. As Labour had tended to revile
The new spatial planning in the Thames Gateway                                        623




UDCs when in opposition this seemed to be an about-face. However, ministers and civil
servants argued that they would adapt rather than adopt the powers and structures
of the old UDCs, attracted by the expediency of not having to introduce new legislation
to do this. Rather than create a single UDC for the whole Thames Gateway, the decision
early on was to use a variety of institutional forms (Raco, 2005b).
    The London Thames Gateway Development Corporation (LTGDC) published its
Engines for Growth: Our Vision for the Lower Lea Valley and London Riverside in 2005
(LTGDC, 2005) while the Olympic Delivery Authority (ODA) has its own plans and
Delivery Programme (ODA, 2006). Such plans and strategies exist alongside a host
of other plans and strategies from a variety of delivery agencies.
    Partly in response to the changes to the Thames Gateway scheme brought about by
the decision to hold the 2012 Olympics in London and partly in response to criticisms
of complexity and a lack of delivery the DCLG published a policy framework and
interim plan for the area in November 2006 (DCLG, 2006a). At this stage, projections
for new housing were raised from 120 000 to 160 000. Despite the additional clarity
which the interim plan introduced, criticism over the complexity of the project and
institutional landscape has continued (HoC, 2007; NAO, 2007). Concern has been
expressed that actors and institutions at a subregional level tend not to look beyond
the immediate concerns of their areas (Deloitte, 2006; NAO, 2007) and that phasing
of development both spatially and sectorally will provide particular challenges for
links between strategic thinking and delivery (DCLG, 2006b). In November 2007 the
Committee of Public Accounts (HoC, 2007) claimed the government lacked leadership
over the project still and had yet to provide a clearly costed implementation plan. Later
the same month the government announced plans to support the Gateway with public
investment of »9 billion, involving the building of eight new hospitals and the building
or refurbishment of twenty-seven schools and three new university campuses (DCLG,
2007), simultaneously increasing the jobs target to 225 000.
3.1 Rescaling and spatial planning in Thames Gateway
Theories of state restructuring and rescaling highlight complexity, evolution, and
political struggle (Brenner, 2004). As such, there are identifiable broad tendencies in
how state restructuring is taking place, but there is no predetermined outcome:
   ``Particular forms of economic and political system privilege some strategies over
     others, access by some forces of others, some interests over others, some spatial
     scales of action over others, some time horizons over others, some coalition
     possibilities over others'' (Jessop, 1997, page 63).
     Political forces act in and through the state to pursue particular ends (Goodwin
et al, 2005). However, according to this strategic relational approach (SRA), the state
apparatus itself is neutral and only acts as a conduit for struggles over the ``economic
and extra-economic regularisation of capitalist economies involved in securing the
hegemony of a specific accumulation strategy'' (Jessop, 1997, page 63). The incessant
nature of state restructuring could help explain the constantly changing nature of
governance and partnerships in areas such as the Thames Gateway including the
existence of ``territorial mismatches and policy overlaps'', the ways in which some
practices and strategies are privileged over others and how differential access emerges
and is inscribed in processes and outcomes (Goodwin et al, 2005).
     A further dimension of SRA discussed above concerns the strategic nature of state
activity: certain scales and strategies will be privileged over others. Some social forces
will be able to prevail and encourage the state to support various strategies over others.
Again, such an understanding could help explain the incessant restructuring of institu-
tions and policies in the Thames Gateway as different social forces attempt to secure
624                                                                  P Allmendinger, G Haughton




strategies optimal to themselves. The corollary of this is that some strategies and
practices will be made more difficult to realise.
     Evidence from the research highlights that this is the case, to a point. In the
Thames Gateway different scales are privileged for different functions and by different
interests. Two sets of distinctions exist. The first concerns strategy making. At the
national scale there is now considerable formal and informal consultation around
changes to the planning system involving the major stakeholders in the planning pro-
cess, the professions, developers, and a range of lobby groups. But less immediately
apparent is the considerable interdepartmental lobbying taking place, a process which
runs alongside the formal processes of external consultation through issuing green
papers, white papers, and draft Planning Policy Statements. What our interviews
revealed was that for planning in particular, when thinking about the privileging of
particular scales, it is important not to underestimate the continuing role of the centre
in shaping planning both nationally and subnationally. In particular, our interviews
with central government civil servants revealed how key government planning policies
emerged through negotiations with other national government departments, as we will
return to below.
     Because of its national importance, there exists an unparalleled degree of interest in
the Thames Gateway among government departments, with a special unit in DCLG
responsible for providing overall coordination. Over and above this, however, our
interviews revealed the importance to the more economic departments of government
of the contribution the area could make to the national growth agenda.
     The other strategic scale of interest is for the whole Thames Gateway and its main
subregions. Notwithstanding the views of civil servants, there was broad agreement
among others that Thames Gateway was `overplanned' in the sense that there are too
many strategies, plans, partnerships, and agencies involved. For instance, we were told
that:
   ``I'm firmly of the view that the government needs to take an axe to the whole of this
     and create a single body for the Gateway ... which is a UDC in the true sense of
     the word ... whose sole objective is delivery of the government's objectives for the
     Gateway'' (housing developer).
   ``There is no-one in overall control ... . Different actors are doing different destructive
     things ... . It's going to be guerrilla war again ... . Just because it's screwed up ... there's
     so many loose ends ... nobody's coordinating it'' (partnership agency).
     In stark contrast, the government's perspective is that coordination is already in
place, providing a multilevel approach which largely builds on the existing institutional
infrastructure whilst adding new bodies where specific problems or potential existed:
   ``It's not so complex if you're working in an individual area ... . It's only when
     you look at the whole picture ... which none of the deliverers are actually doing.
     It's only when you look at the whole picture when you start to get worried about
     the complexity'' (civil servant B).
     This experience is not unique to the Thames Gateway: other regional planning
bodies are in the process of preparing RSSs which break up regions into smaller
subareas based around `functional' planning (eg travel-to-work or housing-market
areas). The preferred scale for strategy making in Thames Gateway is currently sub-
regional, though different agencies and bodies have different subregions. The revised
London Plan, for example, identifies the Sub-Regional Development Framework for
East London while the London Development Agency is preparing subregional eco-
nomic development implementation plans. Which particular subregions will become
the basis for strategic planning purposes is still unclear.
The new spatial planning in the Thames Gateway                                                 625




     The second distinct scale concerns delivery. Here, the privileged scale could be
termed `sub-subregional'. Developers and housebuilders focus upon delivery, and
privilege a scale below the subregion though above specific sitesö only rarely do
these coincide with preexisting administrative boundaries such as those of local
government. Indeed, this is very much part of the rationale of the emergent new
scales (and boundaries) of governance, that they are selected to reflect real-world
problems or development potential rather than administrative convenience. In the
case of these smaller scales of intervention, the driving issue may be that infrastructure
provision, decontamination of sites and investment in services require a more holistic
view than a site standpoint as well as a proactive, spatial planning perspective that
seeks to coordinate and integrate a range of sectors. For those involved in creating the
new institutional geographies, or making decisions to empower existing institutional
arrangements, the decisions were seen to be apolitical, technical decisions about what
works best in different circumstances:
   ``You've got to realise why the boundary was drawn where it was ... . It's not to fit
     where the bodies are ... it's to fit where the complex opportunities are ... . So no ... the
     boundaries don't map with anything'' (interview, civil servant B).
     What is significant to note is that such privileged scales for strategy/coordination
and delivery exist as both informal and nonstatutory scales. Both subregional strategy
making and sub-subregional delivery fit between statutory scales of spatial and regu-
latory planning. In effect, we are seeing the emergence of new scales for strategy
making which run alongside the formal scales of statutory planning, the regional and
local, as government experiments with new forms of strategic and delivery bodies.
What we begin to see in the case of the Thames Gateway is how some of the soft
spaces and fuzzy boundaries we identified earlier are being inserted at the local level,
attempting not so much to depoliticise the governance of development as to allow
the possibility for a repoliticisation by drawing actors together in ways which, for the
government at least, reflect the real geographies of development, alongside the admin-
istrative geographies of democratically elected local bodies. Whilst presented as
technical, or neutral decisions, it is hard not to reflect that these soft spaces and fuzzy
boundaries also provide a tactic for destabilising oppositional tendencies embedded
within existing institutional geographies. In the process, their creation opens up
new possibilities for thinking about regeneration, which allow for a degree of separation
from the formal scales of planning and democratic representation, with all the history
and slowness with which they are, rhetorically at least, associated. The important thing
here is that formal planning systems are not being dismantled; indeed, they provide
a critical dimension of political legitimacy. Instead, new relationships between formal
and other scales of planning are being built. Not surprisingly then, for some at least:
   ``Fuzziness is probably a good thing ... . We have legal processes and structures ... the
     statutory planning system ... but it's good that within that statutory system ... those
     constraints ... you have enough room for manoeuvrability to come up with plans that
     cover functional areas ... that are actually fuzzy ... that are flexible ... that are actually
     responsive to the real geography of place'' (civil servant C, project workshop, 2007).
     What do the experiences of the Thames Gateway tell us about scalar privilege? We
know little about why some scales will be privileged over others only that we should
expect privileging to occur. As Jessop (1997) points out (see above), the privileging of a
scale can be interpreted as securing the hegemony of a specific accumulation strategy.
The experience of the Thames Gateway hints at a range of other (possibly related)
reasons including, we believe, the nonstatutory and therefore much more fluid and
informal nature of strategy making at this scale. As the Greater London Authority
(GLA) put it, the subregional plan for the east of London:
626                                                           P Allmendinger, G Haughton




   ``provide(s) non-statutory guidance on implementation of London Plan policies in
     light of sub-regional circumstances. The [subregional plan] is not a `mini London
     Plan' and does not usurp, supersede or otherwise change the Plan's policies ... .
     The [subregional plan] is not considered to be Supplementary Planning Guidance
     or a Supplementary Planning Document or to have equivalent status in the terms
     of Planning Policy Statement 12'' (GLA, 2006, paragraphs 7 ^ 8).
Formal and statutory strategy making is linked to a range of procedures and processes
that bind decision makers in ways that more informal approaches do not. However,
such informal approaches are given legitimacy, as in the case of the London Plan
above, through linking them to statutory approaches.
     Second, it is clear that regions per se are not being privileged. Institutional and
formal strategy making and implementation are increasingly, but not exclusively, being
focused upon this scale. Indeed, from certain perspectives formal regions might
actually `get in the way' of strategy making and delivery. Instead, the scales most
appropriate for strategy making and delivery are to be found cutting across existing
administrative boundaries, focused around `functional' planning areas and linked to
issues such as transport and infrastructure. The rescaling of spatial planning in Thames
Gateway appears to be `filling in' the gaps between formal structures and processes. We
would argue, then, that it is important to examine how rescaling works across multiple
scales, including emergent `soft spaces' of governances, rather than simply privileging
specific scales of governance. It is how the many scales of governance intersect and
interact which matters, not simply the scales which are perceived to be the primary
`beneficiaries' or `losers' in rescaling.
     Finally, and related, there is more than one privileged scale. We might term this
`functional scalar privilege'. There is a clear mismatch between some institutional
boundaries that could be termed subregional and more `functional' subregional areas
based on housing-market or travel-to-work areas. One consequence of this is that
where such areas coincide there can be a reinforcement of activity through focused
resources and consensus. Where such areas do not coincide (for example, where there is
no overlap between functional planning areas and institutionally defined subregions)
then there can be the loss of development momentum and a deficit of resources and
consensus. One implication is the creation of greater disparities in activity and output
between areas. The experiences of the first London Docklands Development Corpora-
tion were that such boundaries provided clear demarcations of growth and decline
(Brownhill, 1990). By contrast, the current round of UDCs has been mandated not
to leave such `cliff edges' at their boundaries; instead working with somewhat `fuzzy
boundaries' at their margins, while central government refers to vague `zones of change'
to help overcome this problem or, at least, mask it:
   ``The legislation was quite clear when we were set up ... . It refers to not creating
     a cliff edge on our boundary ... . And we've already started a series of projects with
     the residential populations which adjoin the areas'' (Gateway delivery agency A).
3.2 Spatial planning and sectoral integration
The notion of spatial planning echoes many of the concerns of `governance' in its focus
upon outcomes, integration, multilevel governance, and partnerships. Advocates of
spatial planning highlight the ways in which it overcomes the separation of plan
making and decision taking in the UK planning system and how mechanisms such
as Community Strategies and Local Development Frameworks can act as places for
sectoral integration and well as spatial coordination (Upton, 2006).
    We were particularly interested in how central steering of planning took place, not
simply within the main planning ministry, but across all the eight or so government
The new spatial planning in the Thames Gateway                                      627




departments regularly consulted on planning issues. In our interviews with key civil
servants during 2005, when the ODPM was formally responsible for planning, it quickly
became clear how much effort was going in across government departments to shape
planning policy. As a civil servant from outside the ODPM/DCLG put it:
   ``The sorts of reforms that are now underway, including the Planning Act 2004 ... a
     big influence on that came from the Treasury through the productivity team ... and
     the Chancellor was certainly keen to have in place a simpler, more flexible
     and faster planning system. I think our key objective of these reforms as they roll
     out is that they do deliver that'' (civil servant A).
     What we begin to see from such sentiments is the way in which the emergent rules
of spatial planning are being shaped by diverse sources within government. More than
this, we can begin to see how the rules of planning are being drawn up in ways which
build not simply on the expertise and interests of planners, but of a much wider range
of professional interests, reflected both in intragovernmental lobbying and the range of
outside bodies willing to invest time in seeking to influence the shape of future
planning legislation and guidance. From the very top, then, the boundaries of `plan-
ning' have been opened upöand this has been to an extent a three-way process, as
nonplanners have an increased role in shaping the planning system, as planners have
sought to open themselves up to wider influences, and as professional planners are
drawn into working with various delivery agencies. The fuzzy geographical boundaries
of planning thus have a counterpart in the fuzzy professional boundaries of spatial
planning.
     More than this, perhaps, we see that there is no `sectoral' privileging at work.
Where planners were perhaps demonised and marginalised during the earlier experi-
ments in, for instance London Docklands, the current governance arrangements for
the Thames Gateway see planning not as a necessary formality or a standalone
statutory enforcement mechanism. Rather, we found planning a pervasive professional
influence in many different bodies, but certainly not a lead or dominant influence.
     The experience of Thames Gateway highlights the challenges of delivering
integrated spatial planning. Vertical integration has proved to be difficult because
different parts of Thames Gateway ö while functionally related ö fall with different
RSSs, Regional Economic Strategies, and Regional Housing Strategies. The upshot
of this has been that the RSSs themselves have `stood back' to some degree on
the question of strategic planning in the Gateway. One consequence has been the
emergence of strategies and plans to fill this gap.
     In ways akin to how many local authorities informally coordinated strategic and
cross-boundary issues during the 1980s similar `shadow initiatives' have emerged in
Thames Gateway. The three regional planning bodies with the support of the ODPM
published an interregional planning statement in 2004 drawn up by an interregional
forum. The statement seeks to coordinate strategic planning until the East of England
and South East Regional Spatial Strategies are adopted and the London Plan has been
reviewed (ODPM, 2004). This statement builds upon the earlier 2003 coordinating
statement (ODPM, 2003a).
     In terms of sectoral integration, the health sector was particularly interesting.
Good working relationships were established early on with planning and regeneration
agencies for the Thames Gateway, leading to the publication in 2003 of a joint report
by the (then) three London Strategic Health Authorities, London Thames Gateway
Health Services Assessment 2003 ^ 2016 (NE London NHS, 2003). Known as the `Blue
Book' this represented a considerable step forward for the UK health sector in how it
addressed future investment in a more spatially informed way, and as such it generated
considerable comment as an exemplar for others to follow during our interviews.
628                                                               P Allmendinger, G Haughton




One of the key breakthroughs was moving away from trend-based official census-based
population projections to working with the government's aspirational population targets
for the Thames Gateway.
     In many ways, the Thames Gateway health sector provides an example of how
successful cross-sectoral and multiscalar coordination might work, as other actors
respond to the government's plans for the area:
   ``The strategic framework that we're publishing feeds into the other departments
     as well so they're starting aligning their plans ... . We work with the Department
     of Health for example ... they've aligned their spending to Thames Gateway and
     they're giving extra spending to the growth areas now ... . But we also work with the
     PCTs [primary care trusts] and strategic health authorities ... so that they know
     what's going on in the area ... and they can respond to where the need is going to
     be ... so again it does tailor ... although there are quite a few different layers'' (civil
     servant B).
In practice, however, this example of successful coordination was the exception rather
than the rule, whilst its success may have been undermined by a decision to close the
dedicated Thames Gateway health sector coordination unit in early 2007 as part of
a national chain of cutbacks in the face of possible overspending.
3.3 Spatial planning and the delivery of major infrastructure
  ``Unlocking the delivery of infrastructure is the key to unlocking whichever part of
    the region that you are in.''
                                                                    Housing developer
One of the main concerns of those we spoke to was getting the providers of infra-
structure to increase the local capacity in line with, or in anticipation of, the stated
plans for increases in population and workforce. Part of this reflected the particular
timing of our main interviews in the Thames Gateway, in 2006 when national negotia-
tions were underway for the next Comprehensive Spending Review, with government
departments all preparing their bids. But there was a more specific concern with
the ways in which different agencies were prepared to engage with the development
agenda for the Thames Gateway. We look here at how stakeholders within planning
and beyond were focusing on ensuring appropriate infrastructure investment took
place.
    Firstly, there were concerns about the hard infrastructure necessary for develop-
ment, including transport, water, flood defences, and land preparation. Secondly, and
relatedly, there were serious concerns about the `soft infrastructure', covering educa-
tion, health, open space, and other aspects of what might once have been thought of as
social planning. We focus here on the twin issues of ensuring responsible agencies
delivered new capacity and the related question of who would pay. In other words,
we are interested here in how spatial planning in the Thames Gateway fits into a
complex landscape of different sectoral plans and strategies, each with their own
institutional geographies, visions, and stakeholders, some covering just small parts
of the Gateway area and others stretching well beyond it.
    What we found was a quite surprising level of comment that the planning system
generally was largely passive and reactive, dealing with the consequences of growth but
ill prepared to `plan' for large-scale growth. To a degree this seems to reflect the
narrowing remit of the planning system during the Thatcher era in particular to a
land-use, developer-friendly role, with this fairly blinkered role continuing even during
the Major years of so-called plan-led growth (Allmendinger, 2003). Such beliefs were
an integral part of the collective and indeed self-interested rationale of key stakeholder
bodies that they were needed to `make things' happen which otherwise would not.
The new spatial planning in the Thames Gateway                                        629




The fragmented institutional landscape of the Thames Gateway, then, may take shape
around particular understandings of local issues and local institutional histories
(see above), but it is rationalised by a more fundamental belief that leaving things
to developers and planners alone was not going to produce the scale of change needed.
As one civil servant confided:
   ``The planning system has always struggled to try to do things ... . Outside of the
     motorway network ... which has had this miraculous secret life really ... aside from
     that planning has always struggled with this problem of large scale ... expensive ...
     infrastructure planning'' (civil servant B).
     From this perspective, one of the greatest challenges facing spatial planning is not
so much agreement around strategy as agreement around collective delivery of the
necessary levels and range of infrastructure to ensure new developments were success-
ful. And to a surprising degree there was a feeling that hitherto planning had not been
centrally involved in achieving this. For most of the past thirty years governments have
dealt with this apparent failure not by reempowering planning to widen its horizons,
but by continued reference to the apparent failures of planning and the need to put in
place alternative delivery mechanisms to deal with this, such as Special Planning
Zones, UDCs, Enterprise Zones, and various other area-based initiatives. Based on
the twin rhetorics of `market failure' in the land market, and planning failure as a form
of effective governance, the approach was to keep planning to a tight land-use remit.
Spatial planning has become associated with an attempt to allow planning to break
out of this circumscribed role to something more central to the development process,
working with others to coordinate the various actions necessary to bring about
high-quality development.
     In this process, planners are not solely responsible for coordination, nor do they
provide a uniquely `spatial' perspective, as was some sometimes claimed in our inter-
views. Instead, our interviews revealed how almost everyone is busily coordinating
with others, across scales and across sectoral boundaries. Just as there is no clear
`scalar privilege' evident in the Thames Gateway, so there is no clear privileging of
a particular lead `sector', such as business, economic development agencies, or planners.
Indeed, it could be argued that planners are not central to the governance processes of
the Thames Gateway: but nor are they marginalised. In essence, they are part of a
fragmented landscape of governance, whose complexity seems to require coordination
not at one particular privileged scale or through one privileged sector, but instead
through some complex, tangled networks operating across scales and sectors.
     More than this, the fragmentary system of governance also requires coordination
across a range of timescales, given the different time horizons of the strategies and
investment plans of the multiplicity of organisations necessarily involved in large-scale
development initiatives. Even within planning, we were frequently told of the need to
balance the relative importance of local and regional plans issues at different times,
to work out which should have precedence. Nonetheless, one thing that the planning
system brings, with its roots in local government, is a sense of continuity and longevity,
allowing it to deal both with short-term plans and with the much longer time horizons
necessary for regenerating parts of the Thames Gateway:
   ``The type of challenges here are not going to be resolved within a four year cycle ...
     some of these individual sites are taking fifteen years to develop ... so they are
     massively complex and massively long-term and in our mind ... it's going to take
     twenty or thirty years'' (civil servant B).
So planners, and others involved in the development process, are not only coordinating
across different spaces and sectors, but also negotiating the resultant different time
scales.
630                                                           P Allmendinger, G Haughton




     The other aspect of delivery which planners are starting to have to deal with more
thoroughly than in the past is the complexity of funding streams involved in large-scale
regeneration. Very few large-scale schemes for urban regeneration now are purely
reliant on public or private investment. Arguably, they never were. But certainly the
range of actors and agencies involved in the contemporary development process is
incredibly complex. For instance, English water companies are now largely privately
owned, they vary hugely in their size and ownership, they are subject to regular intense
media scrutiny of their behaviour, and are responsible to at least three sets of public
regulators in the UK, and subject to EU legislation. Getting water companies to invest
in major new infrastructure capacity involves a negotiation between the aspirations of
planners, developers, local authority departments, company shareholders, numerous
lobbying `stakeholders', and various regulators. Then there are the various other utility
companies, responsible for waste, energy, flood control, land decontamination, transport
infrastructure, and so forth.
     With this complex system of governance comes an increasing complexity of how
funding sources are creatively stitched together, something which in essence everyone is
involved in, as public, private, and quasi-governmental bodies all seek to satisfy their
masters that they are making their money stretch further by `drawing down' funds from
elsewhere. Planners largely use `Section 106 agreements' which secure funding for
infrastructure based upon negotiations with landowners over each development. How-
ever, it is worth emphasising that the Thames Gateway is not an infrastructureless
desert, a popular misperception according to one of our interviewees. Indeed deindus-
trialisation has left some underutilisation of infrastructure capacity, though the bigger
problem is outdated poor-quality services, not least school buildings. This said, there
will be new communities developed in parts of the Thames Gateway, notably Barking
Reach, Ebbsfleet, and the area around the Channel Tunnel Rail Link. It is these that
present some of the most severe problems, ones where Section 106 agreements are
never likely to be sufficient to make up for the infrastructure gap:
   ``land value in theory is high here ... . The market's stronger here ... but often the
     costs are so enormous ... . Barking Reach ... you've got transport costs ... deconta-
     mination costs on a massive scale ... how do you turn this area into an attractive
     residential area ... which more than swamps Section 106 ... . What we're finding in
     Barking Reach is that someone is going to have to fund the transport infrastructure
     because the Section 106 ... will only go so far'' (civil servant E).
     Given the scale of the problems in parts of the Thames Gateway, it is widely
recognised that the key to unblocking infrastructure barriers is accessing mainstream
infrastructure investment sources, requiring negotiations with the major funding
departments of central and local government or other responsible agencies. In addi-
tion, there are the inevitable regeneration competitions for area-based funding from
central government or regional development agencies, as areas set out to present their
particular mix of `need' and `potential' as meriting government funding. Whilst its
constituent local areas could bid for regeneration funding, the Thames Gateway itself
for much of its earlier lifetime did not carry sufficient institutional weight or capacity
to bid for such funds ö indeed, it was the wrong scale to fit in with most government
initiatives of the 1990s. But, as part of the revitalised national interest in pushing
forward development in the area, a dedicated funding package of »673 million over
three years was put in place to assist in site assembly, land remediation, affordable
housing, and providing local infrastructure (DCLG, 2006b). So in attempting to
put together a development, there is a need to negotiate the balance between the main-
stream funding programmes of government, themselves subject to intense bidding
pressure through the Comprehensive Spending Review, competing for area-based funding,
The new spatial planning in the Thames Gateway                                               631




negotiations over developer contributions, and of course developers need internally to
argue the case for their investment.
     But rather than shrink from such complexity, the challenge has been for all involved
to get on with absorbing it into their processes, such that working in partnership, and
working out deals are now the norm, for planners, developers and others:
   ``Locally ... in these days of LSPs [local strategic partnerships] ... perhaps it's second
     nature ... working with the health authority ... water suppliers ... power suppliers ...''
     (civil servant E).

4 Conclusions
Both state rescaling and spatial planning are strongly underpinned by themes of
partnership, coordination, and integration bound up under the notion of `governance'.
In this view, spatial planning is part of the state's `restless search' for governance. In
this paper we have engaged critically with the governance and metagovernance of the
Thames Gateway.
     Metagovernance is the difficult to discern set of processes by which the rules of the
game are imposed and reworked by those who work to shape the planning system, not
simply within the planning ministry, but, as this paper clearly demonstrates, involving
other government departments and the various lobby groups which seek to influence
proposed changes to the planning system. In every sense, the remaking of planning
is shaped by wider processes of metagovernance, involving a reworking of privileged
scales and sectors of policy making, and with this a reworking of who the planning
system must `join up' with, and how. The Thames Gateway is interesting in this respect
because of its national prominence as a regeneration initiative. Our findings begin
to reveal how, in Jessop's terms, governance and metagovernance arrangements do
not operate in some functionalist, unidirectional way which `imposes' a governmental
agenda. Instead, the hybrid governance and government arrangements, with their
multiscalar, multisectoral mixes, reveals the multiplicity of ways in which actors at all
scales seek to address market, state, and governance failures. The research also high-
lights the importance and risks of metagovernance as a means of securing a coherent
economic and state project in a complex economic and political situation, the func-
tionality of fuzzy boundaries and soft spaces in providing room for strategic and
tactical manoeuvre in this regard, and the complexities of how scale and scope are
continuously reconstituted.(4)
     One aspect of delivery in the Thames Gateway that is clear is the extent to which
objectives, including sustainable communities, are being delivered in the spaces
between formal agencies and plans and strategies. Strategy making and delivery in
the Thames Gateway privilege different, informal scales and spaces. This is not
to say the formal scales of planning are now irrelevantöfar from it. But instead it
suggests that planning purely at the formal scales of planning is not sufficient, nor
is it necessarily the case that the delivery of planning objectives is best delivered
and monitored at the level of, say, the Local Development Framework, or the RSS.
As one senior GLA politician told us:
   ``you need a framework which is sufficiently loose that it allows unexpected things
     to happen.''
     More than this, you need frameworks that reflect the reality of how complex
associational networks do not work to set boundaries, whether formal, soft, fuzzy,
or otherwise. They can work with and through the boundaries of different institu-
tional geographies, but the real work which goes on is a reflection of how they stretch

(4) We are particularly grateful to one of the referees for pointing to these connections.
632                                                                 P Allmendinger, G Haughton




across time and place, and come together in particular local places at particular
moments. Rethinking space, then, is a fundamental part of rethinking regeneration
and planning, not just in terms of academic theory but also in terms of development
practices, protocols, and place strategies. This approach opens up possibilities for
further research on whether similar or similar but different approaches exist else-
where, such as low-growth areas, and whether the local political complexion of
planning authorities affects the emergence of formal and informal approaches.
    Parallel networks, strategies, and delivery mechanisms of varying degrees of
formality and linkage to the statutory planning system emerge from this analysis
as central to the regeneration of the Thames Gateway. Recognising this adds a new
dimension to the notion of spatial planning, as it makes clear how much of the real
work of planning takes place outside the formal system for planning, but necessarily
with strong linkages to it. More than this, much of the infrastructure planning to
support land-use planning has surprisingly tenuous links to the formal system of plans,
something which is now being recognised and in a sense formalised through creating
new partnership bodies in which the infrastructure providers are expected to partici-
pate. And these bodies, which look confusing from the outside, have their own internal
logic, a recognition that a perfect institutional landscape does not, indeed cannot, exist
for a development project as complex, as multinodal, and as multiscalar in nature
as the Thames Gateway.
Acknowledgements. Project funded by ESRC grant RES-000-23-0756. We would like to thank
the three reviewers of this paper for their insightful comments.
References
Allmendinger P, 2003, ``From New Right to New Left in UK planning'' Urban Policy and Research
   21 57 ^ 80
Allmendinger P, 2006, ``Zoning by stealth? The diminution of discretionary planning'' International
   Planning Studies 11 137 ^ 143
Allmendinger P, Haughton G, 2007, ``The fluid scales and scope of UK spatial planning''
   Environment and Planning A 39 1478 ^ 1495
Allmendinger P, Tewdwr-Jones M, 2006 Territory, Identity and Space: Planning in a Disunited
   Kingdom (Routledge, London)
Amin A, 2002, ``Spatialities of globalisation'' Environment and Planning A 34 385 ^ 399
Brenner N, 1999, ``Globalisation as reterritorialisation: the re-scaling of urban governance in the
   European Union'' Urban Studies 36 431 ^ 451
Brenner N, 2004 New State Spaces (Oxford University Press, Oxford)
Brownhill S, 1990 Developing London Docklands: Another Great Planning Disaster? (Paul Chapman,
   London)
Castells M, 1977 The Urban Question (Edward Arnold, London)
Counsell D, Haughton G, 2006, ``Advancing together on Yorkshire and the Humber?'', in Territory,
   Identity and Space: Spatial Governance in a Fragmented Nation Eds M Tewdwr-Jones,
   P Allmendinger (Routledge, London) pp 106 ^ 122
DCLG, Department of Communities and Local Government, London
   2006a, ``Thames Gateway Interim Plan Policy Framework'', http://www.communities.gov.uk/
         pub/562/TheThamesGatewayInterimPlanPolicyFramework id1504562.pdf
   2006b, ``Thames Gateway Evidence Review'', http://www.communities.gov.uk/pub/632/
         ThamesGatewayEvidenceReviewOxfordBrookesUniversity id1504632.pdf
   2007, ``Government sets out Gateway plans'', press release, 29 November,
         http://www.communities.gov.uk/news/thamesgateway/565112
Deloitte, 2006, ``The Thames Gateway Programme. Stage 1 of a comprehensive economic statement
   for the Thames Gateway Final Report'', February, Deloitte MCS Ltd, London
DoE, 1995 Regional Planning Guidance 9a Department of the Environment, London
GLA, 2006 The London Plan: Sub-regional Development Framework, East London Greater
   London Authority, London
The new spatial planning in the Thames Gateway                                                       633




Goodwin M, Jones M, Jones R, 2005, ``Devolution, constitutional change and economic
    development: understanding the shifting economic and political geographies of the British
    state'' Regional Studies 39 421 ^ 436
Harvey D, 1989 The Condition of Postmodernity (Blackwell, Oxford)
Haughton G, Counsell D, 2004 Regions, Spatial Strategies and Sustainable Development (Routledge,
    London)
Healey P, 2006,``Territory, integration and spatial planning'', in Territory, Identity and Space: Spatial
    Governance in a Fragmented Nation Eds M Tewdwr-Jones, P Allmendinger (Routledge, London)
    pp 64 ^ 79
HoC, 2007 The Thames Gateway: Laying the Foundations Committee of Public Accounts,
    62nd Report of Session 2006 ^ 2007, 15 November (The Stationery Office, London)
Jessop B, 1997, ``A neo-Gramscian approach to the regulation of urban regimes'', in Reconstructing
    Urban Regime Theory: Regulating Urban Politics in a Global Economy Ed. M Lauria (Sage,
    London) pp 51 ^ 73
Jessop B, 2000, ``The crisis of the national spatio-temporal fix and the ecological dominance of
    globalizing'' International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 24 323 ^ 360
Jessop B, 2004, ``Multi-level governance and multi-level metagovernance changes in the European
    Union as integral moments in the transformation and reorientation of contemporary
    statehood'', in Multi-level Governance Eds I Bache, M Flinders (Oxford University Press,
    Oxford) pp 49 ^ 74
John P, Tickell A, Musson S, 2005, ``Governing the mega-region: governance and networks across
    London and south east England'' New Political Economy 10 91 ^ 106
Keating M, 1997, ``The invention of regions: political restructuring and territorial government in
    Western Europe'' Environment and Planning C: Government and Policy 15 383 ^ 398
Kidd S, 2007, ``Towards a framework of integration in spatial planning: an exploration from a
    health perspective'' Planning Theory and Practice 8 161 ^ 181
LTGDC, 2005 Engines for Growth: Our Vision for the Lower Lea Valley and London Riverside London
    Thames Gateway Development Corporation, http://www.ltgdc.org.uk/aboutus/publications/
NAO, 2007 The Thames Gateway: Laying the Foundations National Audit Office (The Stationery
    Office, London)
NE London NHS, 2003 London Thames Gateway Health Services Assessment 2003 ^ 2016,
    http://www.neLondon.nhs.uk/Thamesgateway/downloads/Thamesgatewayfinalreport.pdf
ODA, 2006, ``The Olympic Park Delivery Programme'', Olympic Delivery Authority,
    http://www.alastinglegacy.co.uk/content/legacy/oda/
ODPM, Office of the Deputy Prime Minister, London
    2003a Creating Sustainable Communities; Making it Happen: Thames Gateway and the Growth
        Areas
    2003b Government Response to ODPM Select Committee Report on Planning for Sustainable
        Communities: Sustainable Communities in the South East http://www.communities.gov.uk/
        index.asp?id=1140241
    2004 Growth and Regeneration in the Gateway: Interregional Planning Statement by the Thames
        Gateway Regional Planning Bodies
    2005 Creating Sustainable Communities: Delivering in Thames Gateway
        http://www.communities.gov.uk/index.asp?id=1500004
Raco M, 2005a,``Sustainable development, rolled-out neo-liberalism and sustainable communities''
    Antipode 37 324 ^ 347
Raco M, 2005b, ``A step change or a step back?: the Thames Gateway and the re-birth of the Urban
    Development Corporations'' Local Economy 20 141 ^ 153
RTPI, 2001, ``A new vision for planning'', Royal Town Planning Institute, London
Upton R, 2006, ``Spatial planning: here to stay?'' Planning Theory and Practice 7 111 ^ 114
Vigar G, Healey P, Hull A, Davoudi S, 2000 Planning, Governance and Spatial Strategy in Britain:
    An Institutionalist Analysis (Macmillan, Basingstoke, Hants)
Wildavsky A, 1973 ``If planning is everything, maybe it's nothing'' Policy Sciences 4 127 ^ 153




                                                                     ß 2008 Pion Ltd and its Licensors
Conditions of use. This article may be downloaded from the E&P website for personal research
by members of subscribing organisations. This PDF may not be placed on any website (or other
online distribution system) without permission of the publisher.
