[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: journal/T04-duranton-puga-2020-the-economics-of-urban-density-10.1257-jep.34.3.3.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Title:           The Economics of Urban Density
Author:          Gilles Duranton and Diego Puga
Creator:         Adobe InDesign CC 13.1 (Macintosh)
Producer:        Adobe PDF Library 15.0
CreationDate:    Thu Jul  9 22:19:20 2020 WIB
ModDate:         Fri Jul 10 21:03:53 2020 WIB
Custom Metadata: no
Metadata Stream: yes
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            AcroForm
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           24
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       504 x 720 pts
Page rot:        0
File size:       735758 bytes
Optimized:       no
PDF version:     1.4
[Extracted Text]
     Journal of Economic Perspectives—Volume 34, Number 3—Summer 2020—Pages 3–26




The Economics of Urban Density



Gilles Duranton and Diego Puga




E
          verybody loves density. Economists like to model and quantify the many
          benefits of urban density. It boosts productivity and innovation, improves
          access to goods and services, reduces travel needs, encourages more energy-
efficient buildings and forms of transport, and allows broader sharing of scarce
urban amenities. Other social scientists and urban planners, along with many
­policymakers, share this fondness for density and would like to see it increase in
 cities everywhere, including the densest ones.
      We share some of that enthusiasm, but we also recognize that high density is
 synonymous with crowding. Indeed, there is a meaningful trade-off between the
 benefits and costs of density, and it is not clear that these benefits and costs are
 appropriately weighted by either market or political forces. One reason for this
 is that the benefit-cost calculation looks very different for insiders, long settled in
 the city, compared with outsiders considering moving in. In addition, the benefits
 and costs often operate at very different spatial and temporal scales, so they are not
 necessarily incorporated by all city constituents.
      Understanding density is also tricky because density is both a cause and a conse-
 quence of the evolution of cities. Anything that makes a city relatively more attractive
 (such as a productivity increase or improved amenities) draws population from
 other places, which puts upward pressure on house prices, which in turn translates



■ Gilles Duranton is Dean’s Chair in Real Estate Professor at Wharton School, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. His email address is duranton@wharton.upenn.
edu. Diego Puga is Professor of Economics at Cemfi (Center for Monetary and Financial
Studies), Madrid, Spain. His email address is diego.puga@cemfi.es.
For supplementary materials such as appendices, datasets, and author disclosure statements, see the
article page at https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.34.3.3.
4   Journal of Economic Perspectives




into higher land prices. Faced with a higher price per unit area of land, developers
opt to build with a greater capital-to-land ratio (essentially, taller buildings). Faced
with a higher price per unit area of floorspace, residents opt for smaller residences.
With people living on smaller dwellings in taller buildings, density increases. In this
sense, density is a consequence of urban evolutions.
      At the same time, density is also a cause of many significant changes happening
in cities. On the production side, agglomeration economies make firms and workers
more productive in dense urban environments than in other locations. The benefits
of density for innovation through spillovers are harder to measure but also deemed
substantial. On the consumption side, higher density brings many goods and services
closer, lowering travel needs. Changes in the amount and form of transport and
more energy-efficient construction allow density to mitigate total pollution, albeit
concentrating exposure to it. Historically, greater exposure to pollution and disease
have been some of the greatest hazards of dense urban environments, and while
they have lost our attention, they remain relevant today. These pitfalls, together with
greater crowding and congestion, more costly floorspace for residents and firms,
and scarcer green space, imply that density also has downsides. The combined bene-
fits and costs of higher density also lead to changes in the composition of cities,
triggering changes in the quality and variety of goods and services that are avail-
able—amenities in particular.
      In this paper, we discuss what economic researchers have learned about density
and what we see as the most significant gaps in this understanding. We begin by
describing how economic research measures density for empirical enquiries and
how this measurement is rapidly changing with increasingly detailed data. We then
explore the benefits and costs of density, how the trade-off between them is resolved,
and the welfare effects of how market and political forces affect density.


Measuring Density

      Population or employment density is often used as a summary statistic to
describe the spatial concentration of economic activity. In this context, density is
commonly defined as the number of individuals per unit geographic area. Such
“naive density” is easy to calculate. However, it may not appropriately reflect the
density actually faced by the individual or firm at hand.
      One problem is that economic units are traditionally defined as aggregates of
administrative units. For example, US metropolitan areas are defined based on coun-
ties, but if a metro area includes some counties with substantial rural portions, such
a calculation will understate the density experienced by most economic actors. In
particular, the match between urban and county boundaries is systematically looser
for younger and less dense metropolitan areas in the West. An extreme example
is the metropolitan area of Flagstaff, Arizona, which includes the second-largest
county in the country and expands across multiple national parks, monuments, and
forests.
                                                           Gilles Duranton and Diego Puga         5




      Data have now become available with much finer geographical detail than in
the past. Traditional data from statistical agencies, which were previously aggregated
into fairly large and often arbitrary administrative units, are now provided at a much
finer spatial resolution. For instance, the US Census Bureau now routinely releases
information for more than 200,000 “block groups” instead of 3,000 counties. Also,
data such as property prices or retail locations that were hard or expensive to obtain
have become more broadly accessible in many countries. A variety of new digital
and pictorial trails has also become available, from cellphone data tracking the loca-
tion of people to high-resolution satellite imagery or street-level photography.
      These newly available data offer research opportunities but also raise three
questions concerning: 1) choice of scale, 2) using a single “index” measure of
density, and 3) the appropriate variable of interest for measuring density. Let’s
discuss these in turn.
      The first issue is that choosing the appropriate scale at which to measure density
is specific to the particular question being raised. Some agglomeration mechanisms
rely on direct human interactions, which in turn suggest that effective density should
be measured at a small spatial scale. In this symposium, Rosenthal and Strange discuss
the literature about agglomeration economies from short-distance interactions.
The study of urban travel may require the measurement of density within a five- to
ten-kilometer radius to capture the distance within which most errands take place
(Duranton and Turner 2018). In contrast, the metropolitan level may be relevant to
measure broad-based agglomeration effects happening through local labor markets.
The choice of scale does not stop at the level of metropolitan areas. Another thread of
literature, inspired by Krugman (1991), has considered the much longer distances at
which physical goods, and intermediate inputs in particular, can be traded. Given our
urban focus, we leave aside the concentration of economic activity at a regional scale.
      The choice of scale requires data on density and its effects to match. For
example, De la Roca and Puga (2017) and Henderson, Kriticos, and Nigmatulina
(forthcoming) have proposed measuring “experienced density” by counting popu-
lation within a given radius around each individual. De la Roca and Puga (2017)
then average this measure across individuals in each city, given that they do not
observe the exact location within the city of employers in their wage regression.
Such experienced density, in addition to dealing with the uneven tightness of area
boundaries, better captures how close the typical individual is to other people when
population is unevenly distributed. To give an example at the country level where
boundaries are given, the United States has nearly nine times the population of
Canada with a slightly smaller surface area, so its naive density is ten times higher.
And yet, walking around cities and towns in both countries, one likely perceives
similar concentrations of people nearby. Indeed, the average inhabitant in Canada
has about 343,000 people living within a ten-kilometer radius, compared with about
306,000 in the United States.1

1
 We calculate experienced density using 2010 gridded population data at 3 arc-second resolution from
WorldPop (2013). We first measure the number of people within a ten kilometer radius of each cell
6    Journal of Economic Perspectives




      Instead of concentrating attention on the immediate neighborhood, a spatial
decay factor giving more weight to closer neighbors may also be used. It is also
possible to measure population density for fine spatial units and then to take a
population-weighted average for larger units that match the dependent variable.
Ciccone and Hall (1996) provide an early example of this approach. Their produc-
tivity measure is at the state level, but they compute employment density at the
county level before taking an employment-weighted average by state. This weighting
avoids distorting the calculation of density in large states like Texas where there are
vast rural portions but the population is highly concentrated in a small number of
counties.
      It is tempting for researchers to define the appropriate measure scale or density
as the one that yields the largest or most statistically significant coefficient in the
regression of interest, either implicitly or explicitly in a horse race across different
measures. This temptation should be resisted. The largest or most significant coef-
ficient may also be the one suffering from the worst identification problems.
      The second problem is that any standard density measure tries to summarize
a two-dimensional distribution (individuals within an area) with a single index
number. However, other “shapes” of density may matter, and alternative charac-
teristics of cities beyond just their population and land area can now be measured
at a reasonable data cost. Such characteristics include the number of centers and
subcenters, the mixture of land use, the compactness of development, and more. In
a study of cities in India, Harari (forthcoming) find that such variables may affect a
wide range of urban outcomes.
      The third consideration involves choosing the variable of interest to use when
measuring density. Following the pioneering work of Ciccone and Hall (1996),
much of the literature that seeks to quantify the effects of the concentration of
economic activity on productivity has focused on population and employment
density—a choice driven mostly by the easy availability of these data. However, a
case can be made that the density of human capital (Moretti 2004) or the density of
business activity in the same sector of economic activity (Henderson 1974; Moretti
2019) might be more relevant variables. Moreover, as we discuss below, empirically
separating agglomeration effects within and across sectors remains largely an open
empirical question.
      Along with these three challenges of scale, the appropriate index number, and
the appropriate variable of interest, new sources of data on location and economic
activity keep opening new possibilities for analysis of density. Traditional sources of
population data typically measure population at its place of residence, which can
work fine if the analysis is done at the metropolitan level and most people live and


in the population grid. We then compute, for all grid cells (in the entire country in this example, or
in each city when we consider US metropolitan areas below), the population-weighted average of this
count of people within ten kilometers. Weighting by population is important, since otherwise we would
be calculating population within ten kilometers of the average place instead of within ten kilometers of
the average person.
                                                     The Economics of Urban Density    7




work in the same area. However, once we start trying to measure the effects of the
concentration of economic activity at a fine spatial scale, a nighttime measure of
density based on residences may not match well with a daytime measure of density
based on employment.
     Cellphone data open the possibility of tracking people and measuring their
location throughout the day (Kreindler and Miyauchi 2019). Indeed, cellphone
data even allow researchers to track those interactions directly, either by studying
who is talking with whom on the phone (Büchel and Ehrlich 2016; Büchel et al.
2019) or by studying who is in the same building with whom at the same time (Atkin,
Chen, and Popov 2019).
     Building-level data represent both day- and night-time density, and thus may
offer a compromise. Daytime satellite imagery and, in some countries, official
sources such as a land registry can provide detailed location data for individual
buildings (Baragwanath-Vogel et al. forthcoming; de Bellefon et al. forthcoming).
Information about built-up land is widely used to apportion population data
measured at a broader scale to produce finely “gridded” population data (Leyk et
al. 2019). “Night-lights” satellite imagery offers the possibility of easier compari-
sons across countries and does not rely on the availability of more traditional
administrative sources. However, it suffers from a range of measurement prob-
lems, notably, the glow from bright sources of light—as discussed in this journal by
Donaldson and Storeygard (2016). Building-level data, combined with population
data, have the added benefit of being able to distinguish between population per
unit of land area and population per unit of floorspace, which measures crowding
more directly.
     We have seen that most density measures either count individuals for
comparable units or normalize this count by the geographical size of each unit.
This raises a long-standing question: Should we measure the concentration of
economic activity with its overall scale or its density? Induction suggests that, taken
to extremes, neither density alone nor scale alone are particularly appealing. For
instance, a highly concentrated but tiny cluster of economic activity is unlikely to
generate strong agglomeration economies. On the other hand, workers located
at the edge of large metropolitan areas are unlikely to benefit from their full
scale in the job-matching process. The theoretical literature is mostly agnostic in
the density versus scale debate. While the bulk of the work modeling the micro-
foundations of agglomeration economies focuses on scale effects (Duranton and
Puga 2004), this is mostly a modeling choice, and it is easy to model agglomera-
tion effects stemming from local density (Ciccone and Hall 1996).
     Empirically, the relationship between city density and city population is very
tight, provided we measure density carefully enough. Panel A of Figure 1 plots for
US metropolitan areas experienced density, measured as population within ten kilo-
meters of the average resident, against total population. The implied elasticity is
0.51. If we use, instead, “naive density,” dividing total population by total land area
within the official boundaries of the metropolitan areas, we find the same elasticity
with respect to total population, 0.51, but the fit is poorer with an R 2 of 0.49 instead
8                                 Journal of Economic Perspectives



Figure 1
Density versus Population for US Metropolitan Areas

       A: Experienced density                                                      B: Naive density




Experienced density: population within
                                         2,500,000                                                                     1,250




                                                                                      Naive density: city population
                                          500,000                                                                       250

                                          100,000                                                                        50




 10km of average resident (log scale)
                                                                                                                         10


                                                                                       per square km (log scale)
                                           20,000

                                            4,000                                                                         2
                                                   12 5,                                                                            5,
                                                                                                                                  25 000
                                                                                                                                    0,
                                                   25 000
                                                     0,
                                                   50 000                                                                         50 000
                                                                                                                                1, 0,0
                                                                                                                                  00 0
                                                 1, 0,0
                                                   00 00
                                                 2, 0,0                                                                         2, 0,0
                                                                                                                                  00 00  0
                                                   00 00
                                                 4, 0,0
                                                   00 00                                                                  12    4, 0,0
                                                                                                                                  00 00
                                                                                                                                8, 0,0
                                                 8, 0,0
                                                   0 0
                                                16 00, 0                                                                          0 0
                                                                                                                               16 00 0
                                                                                                                                 ,0 ,00
                                                                                                                                   00 0
                                                  ,0 00
                                                    00 0
                                                       ,0 00                                                                         ,0 00
                                                     City population                                                             City population
                                                       (log scale)                                                                 (log scale)


                                                              Metro areas East of the Mississippi
                                                              Metro areas West of the Mississippi

Source: Authors’ calculations based on data from WorldPop (2013) and US Census Bureau (2011). See
footnote 2 for details.




of 0.76. This poorer fit is evident in Panel B, which also shows this is mostly because
of artificially low densities in metropolitan areas with large rural portions in the
western United States.2


The Benefits from Density

Productivity Benefits
      Quantifying the productivity benefits from density has been a core theme in
urban economics for several decades, and there is now broad consensus on their
magnitude. The meta-analysis of Ahlfeldt and Pietrostefani (2019) suggests an elas-
ticity of productivity with respect to density of 0.04 based on a citation-weighted

2
  We calculate experienced density using 2010 gridded population data at 3 arc-second resolution from
WorldPop (2013) as detailed in footnote 1 above. We calculate naive density using population and land
area data from the 2010 US Census (US Census Bureau, 2011). To define cities, we use Metropolitan
Statistical Area (MSA) and Consolidated Metropolitan Statistical Area (CMSA) definitions outside of
New England and New England County Metropolitan Area (NECMA) definitions in New England, as set
by the Office of Management and Budget on June 30, 1999. This defines 275 metropolitan areas in the
conterminous United States.
                                                    Gilles Duranton and Diego Puga     9




average of estimates in the literature, on Combes, Duranton, Gobillon, Puga, and
Roux (2012), and on an earlier meta-analysis (Melo, Graham, and Noland 2009).
Because the research on this topic has been reviewed carefully and extensively
elsewhere (Rosenthal and Strange 2004; Puga 2010; Moretti 2011; Combes and
Gobillon 2015), we focus this section on how such estimates are done and some
recent developments.
      Most estimates of the productive benefits from density are obtained by
comparing productivity or earnings across spatial units with different densities. Early
studies of productivity, starting with Sveikauskas (1975), studied average output per
worker in cities. More recent studies rely on total factor productivity estimated from
plant-level data to account for systematic differences in factor usage. In the case of
earnings, firms must compare the wages they pay to the productivity benefits they
receive when choosing a location. Both productivity and earnings are systematically
higher in denser cities.
      A concern when regressing productivity on density is that higher productivity
in denser areas does not necessarily reflect a causal relationship. Instead, perhaps
firms and workers are attracted to places with a strong but unobserved productivity
advantage. Four strategies have been used to tackle this potential omitted variable
problem. All of these approaches suggest that, while productivity-based sorting is
a relevant concern, there is indeed a causal relationship in which greater urban
density leads to higher productivity.
      The first strategy uses instrumental variables when estimating the current
density of an area. The usual instruments are historical measures of density (Ciccone
and Hall 1996) and land fertility (Combes et al. 2010). Both rely on differences
in density being persistent over long periods, while the determinants of produc-
tivity have changed dramatically as the economy has evolved from being mostly
agricultural to a concentration on manufacturing and services. Another common
instrument is land suitability for the construction of tall buildings (Rosenthal and
Strange 2008; Combes et al. 2010). A limitation of these approaches is that past
populations and the nature of soils may affect current productivity through the
persistence of productive infrastructure or the ease of building it.
      A second strategy is to include either location or plant fixed effects in an
attempt to capture any unobserved attributes that may have attracted more estab-
lishments to a given city (Henderson 2003). Estimates are then identified from
relating changes in productivity to changes in density over time, so the usefulness
of this strategy is limited by the fact that relative changes in density tend to be small
and slow (the same fact that makes the usual instruments relevant).
      The third strategy is to find a quasi-experimental setting. For example, Green-
stone, Hornbeck, and Moretti (2010) estimate changes in total factor productivity
for incumbent plants in US counties that attracted a new plant investing over
$1 million. When compared to changes in total factor productivity for incumbent
plants in runner-up counties that were being considered as an alternative loca-
tion by the firm, the firm’s final choice can be seen as an exogenous increase in
density.
10   Journal of Economic Perspectives




      The final strategy is to impose more theoretical structure on the problem, as in
Baum-Snow and Pavan (2012) or Ahlfeldt et al. (2015). The latter build a quantita-
tive framework based on a canonical urban model and apply it to Berlin, Germany,
as the Wall was built and then torn down.
      Another important identification issue is sorting. Larger and denser metropol-
itan areas disproportionately attract more educated workers. While one can control
for education and other observable characteristics, unobservable worker traits that
affect productivity may differ systematically across cities. Here, following Glaeser
and Maré (2001) and Combes, Duranton, and Gobillon (2008), the usual strategy is
to introduce worker fixed-effects when relating individual earnings to density. The
productivity benefits of density are then identified from the changes in earnings
that a given worker experiences when changing work location.
      Higher unobserved ability may be intrinsic to a worker due to natural talent
or upbringing, but it may also be something that develops over time as the worker
accumulates job experience. Separating the intrinsic and experience components
of ability helps to evaluate the importance of sorting. It also allows us to study the
extent to which the productive benefits of density can be absorbed almost immedi-
ately or instead accumulate gradually (Glaeser and Maré 2001). De la Roca and Puga
(2017) address this distinction by tracking the experience accumulated by workers in
different locations. They then estimate an earnings regression where, in addition to
incorporating worker fixed effects, they let the value of experience differ depending
both on where it was acquired and where it is used. They conclude that workers
across cities with different levels of density are not particularly different to start with;
instead, working in different cities is mainly what makes their earnings diverge over
time. They find that about one-half of the benefits of density are static and tied to
currently working in a denser city. The other half accrues over time as workers accu-
mulate more valuable experience in denser cities. Furthermore, workers take these
dynamic gains with them when they relocate, which the authors interpret as evidence
of important learning benefits to working in denser cities that get embedded in
workers’ human capital. These gains are stronger for those with higher initial ability.
      Employing a similar strategy to look at the productivity of firms relative to
density is difficult. Plant relocations are much less frequent than worker reloca-
tions. Which firms enter a market and which firms are able to survive may also
be systematically different across more and less dense cities. Combes et al. (2012)
develop a framework to distinguish between agglomeration and firm selection. The
key insight of their model is that stronger selection in denser cities left-truncates the
productivity distribution by removing the least productive firms. Stronger agglom-
eration instead right-shifts the productivity distribution by raising the productivity
of all firms. If more productive firms benefit from density to a greater extent, this
additionally dilates the productivity distribution. Using these insights, French estab-
lishment-level data, and a new quantile approach, Combes et al. (2012) show that
firm selection cannot explain spatial productivity differences. Instead, there are
productivity benefits from density that are even greater for more productive firms.
Gaubert (2018) argues that if, as shown by Combes et al. (2012), more productive
                                                   The Economics of Urban Density    11




firms benefit more from density, they will also sort into denser environments to
start with. Her results indicate that sorting reinforces agglomeration economies in
explaining spatial productivity differences.

Seeking the Sources of Productivity Benefits
      While urban economists broadly agree on the magnitude of the productivity
benefits of density, the evidence distinguishing between possible sources is less
solid. Duranton and Puga (2004) classify the mechanisms into three broad classes.
First, a larger market allows for a more efficient sharing of local infrastructure,
a variety of intermediate input suppliers, or a pool of workers. Second, a larger
market also allows for better matching between employers and employees, or buyers
and suppliers. Finally, a larger market can also facilitate learning, by facilitating
the transmission and accumulation of skills or by promoting the development and
adoption of new technologies and business practices.
      On the empirical side, a widely used strategy to distinguish between mechanisms
is to measure the geographical concentration of different sectors and regress this on
proxies for the different mechanisms (Audretsch and Feldman 1996; Rosenthal and
Strange 2001). Because plants in any given industry are similar in many dimensions,
Ellison, Glaeser, and Kerr (2010) suggest instead studying which similarities across
industries help to predict better co-agglomeration patterns. Both strategies rely on
having good proxies for the underlying sources of agglomeration, and how one
measures these can have an important effect on results. For instance, Overman and
Puga (2010) suggest that, when measuring the importance of buyer-supplier relation-
ships, one cannot just look at the value of input purchases, but instead should focus
on purchases of crucial inputs whose production is geographically concentrated.
      Instead of running a horse race between different agglomeration mechanisms,
another possibility is to try to isolate a particular one. This approach is challenging
because of behavior and outcomes that are difficult to track. Consider knowledge
spillovers. Each of the links—like those from density to additional interactions,
from interactions to information flows, and from information flows to innovation—
is very difficult to trace and measure. In what has for a long time been arguably the
best empirical evidence of knowledge spillovers. Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and Henderson
(1993) show that an inventor of a patent is more likely to live in the same location
as an inventor of a patent it cites than to live in same the location as an inventor of
a similar matched patent it does not cite. However, as ingenious as this strategy is, it
infers interactions from spatial proximity and patents give only a very partial view of
innovative activity. The strategy cannot show whether density increases interactions
nor whether those interactions affect innovation more broadly.
      One way to measure interactions is through survey data. Charlot and Duranton
(2004; 2006) study the use of various communications technologies within and
across firms in France. Their results suggest that dense urban environments result
in more communication across firms and that greater communication results in
higher wages, but they find little support for the hypothesis that density increases
face-to-face interactions.
12   Journal of Economic Perspectives




     More recently, anonymized call detail records from cellphone operators allow
measuring who interacts with whom on the phone. Büchel and Ehrlich (2016) use a
major overhaul of public transport routes and schedules in Switzerland as a source
of exogenous variation to show that proximity (measured by shorter travel times)
does make interactions more likely. Interestingly, they find that, as in the model
of Berliant, Reed, and Wang (2006), density facilitates meeting people, but this in
turn makes people more choosy about with whom they interact. Thus, people in
denser areas do not interact with more people, but those with whom they interact
are better matches. In addition, social networks in dense urban environments are
less characterized by clustering into relatively isolated groups, likely facilitating
more widespread information flows.
     The idea that density facilitates the quality more than the quantity of matches is
also present in labor markets. Dauth et al. (2018) use matched employer-employee
data for Germany to show that high-quality workers (those who get high wages
conditional on observables) are more likely to work for high-quality firms (those
who pay high wages conditional on observables) in denser cities. This assortative
matching reinforces the fact that high-quality workers and firms are also more likely
to locate in denser cities.
     Modern cellphones can also provide information on users’ locations, gathered
from the identifier of the cell tower providing coverage to the user (stored by cell-
phone operators) or from location data collected by smartphone apps (purchased,
combined, processed, and resold by several private companies). These data can
measure spatial proximity of users at a fine geographical scale and within a narrow
period: for example, two people spending more than 15 minutes in the same coffee
place within the same clock-hour. Atkin, Chen, and Popov (2019) use such data
to study how chance meetings contribute to innovation. They isolate smartphone
users who work in buildings belonging to tech companies in Silicon Valley and
trace instances where the users are in the same place at the same time. They sepa-
rate chance from planned meetings and show that chance meetings result in more
patent citations across firms in different sectors whose workers had met by chance
more often. Other interesting new sources of data starting to be used to track
specific agglomeration mechanisms include detailed input-output links between
firms (Bernard, Moxnes, and Saito 2019) and search and matching in job platforms
(Marinescu and Rathelot 2018).

Accessibility Benefits from Density
     All else equal, having the same population of residents and establishments in
a smaller area will reduce bilateral distances. However, shorter bilateral distances
may encourage more trips, and more trips within a compact area may also make
travel slower. What is the net effect of these influences? Using US travel survey
data, Duranton and Turner (2018) estimate an elasticity of the distance traveled
by an individual driver with respect to the density of workers and residents within a
ten-kilometer radius around the driver’s residence of −0.13, which occurs despite a
very small increase in the number of trips by this driver. Travel speed also declines
                                                              Gilles Duranton and Diego Puga            13




with density with elasticity −0.11, but because of reduced distances, total time spent
traveling declines. After considering many alternatives, Duranton and Turner
(2018) conclude that the density of resident population and employment within
a five- or ten-kilometer radius is the main local characteristic explaining distances
traveled by local residents. Looking at credit card records for shopping and the
purchase of personal services, Agarwal, Jensen, and Monte (2019) also document a
decline in travel associated with a greater density of sales locations. Couture (2016)
finds similar results when focusing more narrowly on restaurants.3
     But the accessibility benefits from density cannot be captured by transport
costs alone. The variety, prices, and quality of available goods and venues will all
change with density. In turn, these changes affect the choices made by consumers.
Regarding prices and quality, Handbury and Weinstein (2015) find that larger (and
thus denser) cities do not have significantly different prices for the exact same
grocery products. If prices for a certain type of product tend to be higher in large
metropolitan areas, it is because consumers tend to buy higher quality varieties of
the same product—like organic instead of regular eggs.
     Regarding variety, Handbury and Weinstein (2015) find that the availability of
grocery products, measured at the bar-code level, is much greater in larger cities.
The count of restaurants accessible within a given travel time also increases with
density. To assess the benefits of this expanded variety, Couture (2016) estimates
the elasticity of substitution between restaurants, where a lower elasticity implies
a greater willingness to pass many restaurants to access one’s preferred choice.
Couture’s estimate of about nine for this elasticity is larger than the usual estimates
for consumer goods but low enough to generate frequent trips beyond the closest
restaurant and substantial welfare gains from restaurant density.
     Couture’s (2016) work provides an important bridge with earlier transporta-
tion research that attempts to model accessibility within a discrete choice framework
(following the influential research of Ben-Akiva and Lerman 1985). After making
some distributional assumptions about the preference parameters, it becomes
possible in this framework to recover accessibility for a given location from the
consumers’ choice set of destinations in this location and the costs of reaching these
destinations. For many years, the application of this approach was limited by the
paucity of data about the possible destinations and the cost of reaching them. New
data from sources like Google Place and Google Maps have eased these constraints.
However, one limitation of these accessibility measures is that they take as given
both the location of the origin of trips and the set of destinations, whereas density
matters partly because it changes the set of potential venues and, as a result, possibly
alters the choice of residential location.



3
 While household travel for consumption is “local,” it is not “extremely local.” Using Yelp data for restau-
rant visits in New York City, Davis et al. (2019) find that consumption is, by their metrics, about half as
segregated as residences. Although transport frictions matter, they nonetheless find that social frictions
play a bigger role.
14    Journal of Economic Perspectives




     Another strand of the research literature provides full general equilibrium
models which consider an explicit geography and can be quantified to estimate
policy counterfactuals. Redding and Rossi-Hansberg (2017) provide an excellent
guide to this literature. Among models that consider urban space and transport,
Ahlfeldt et al. (2015) is a particularly accomplished contribution. They model the
development of a city where residents choose their residence and workplace loca-
tions and use this to explore the benefits of density using historical variation in
accessibility due to the Berlin Wall. These location choices are, to a large extent,
guided by utility shocks over particular commuting routes. While this approach
greatly simplifies the derivation of their model, it is limiting for current-day appli-
cations to the extent that commutes represent less than one-fifth of all trips and
about one-fourth of the mileage for US drivers. A challenge for the future will be
to harness the recent modeling advances in economic geography, while keeping
the versatility and ease of implementation of standard discrete choice approaches
used in the transport literature and also making use of the much richer data now
available to study urban travel.
     Although we have discussed the productivity and accessibility benefits of
density separately, they are interrelated. For example, the better accessibility of a
denser urban environment may allow workers to search for better labor market
opportunities (Manning and Petrongolo 2017). In a study of relocating research
and development establishments, Xiao and Wu (2020) find that researchers who
end up with longer commutes to their workplace see a drop in patenting activity
while those who get closer become more productive.4
     One possible way to integrate the productivity benefits from agglomeration
into a transport and accessibility framework is to compute density in a location as
the sum of nearby employment discounted by the travel cost of accessing it. This
follows the suggestion of Graham (2007) and is related to the gravity specifications
of the spatial quantitative models reviewed by Redding and Rossi-Hansberg (2017).
However, it is important to consider such density elasticities with care. For example,
taking an elasticity of earnings with respect to density estimated from cross-city
variation and then applying it to a change in “effective density” resulting from
some expansion of transport infrastructure in one city may overestimate the actual
gains from the project—for instance, if we are considering a new subway line while
agglomeration benefits arise from input-output relations between firms unaffected
by this line.

Other Benefits from Density: Innovation, Reduced Pollution, Amenities
     For brevity, we limit our discussion here to three especially important benefits
of density that seem to us ripe for additional study: innovation, reduced pollution,


4
 In a very different context, Koster, Pasidis, and van Ommeren (2019) provide evidence about shopping
externalities mediated by foot traffic. These shopping externalities are arguably about accessibility since
they arise from transport savings for customers when visiting multiple stores, but they end up affecting
the productivity of stores as reflected in the rents they are willing to pay.
                                                     The Economics of Urban Density     15




and access to amenities. For a literature review that includes other benefits, see
Ahlfeldt and Pietrostefani (2019).
      The extreme concentration of innovative activity is reviewed in Carlino and
Kerr (2015). Moretti (2019) estimates an elasticity of the number of patents per
innovator with respect to the number of innovators in the same city and field of
innovation of about 0.07. This estimate is arguably a lower bound: for example, it
ignores the effect of the concentration of innovators in the same field on the prob-
ability of innovating, and it ignores spillovers arising from other fields of research.
In a prior paper, Carlino, Chatterjee, and Hunt (2007) find a large elasticity of
patenting with respect to urban density of about 0.20, reflecting both the higher
productivity of research in denser places and the concentration of research inputs
in these areas.
      The link between density and pollution is also of particular importance. Residents
in denser cities emit less greenhouse gas and fewer particulates than less dense cities
(Glaeser and Kahn 2010). This result is only in part due to transport. There are large
differences in emissions related to home cooling, even after conditioning out climatic
differences. However, we need to know how much of the lower energy consumption in
denser places is a consequence of smaller dwellings or if there is something uniquely
energy-efficient about greater density. At the same time, as Carozzi and Roth (2019)
note, a higher concentration of population within a city may result in greater overall
exposure to pollution, even with lower emissions per person. After instrumenting for
urban density, they find an elasticity of exposure to particulates (2.5 micrometers or
smaller) with respect to density of 0.13 for the United States.
      The presence of consumption amenities in dense urban areas influences
how one perceives the rising inequality of wages. The increased concentration of
educated workers in a small number of increasingly attractive cities is a salient feature
of the US urban geography and arguably of many other developed countries (Berry
and Glaeser 2005). If living in a dense area offers mainly negative “amenities,” like
crime, then the increased concentration of skilled workers in increasingly expensive
cities implies that inequality is less than wages suggest. If living in a dense area offers
positive amenities, then inequality will exceed what wages suggest (Moretti 2013).
Diamond (2016) argues while rising skill premiums started the process of educated
workers concentrating in dense urban settings, their presence then generated addi-
tional endogenous amenities, which she argues are central to reconciling observed
changes in wages, rents, and the skill composition of residents across cities in the
United States between 1980 and 2000. In highly granular empirical work, Couture
and Handbury (2019) provide direct evidence about the importance of local ameni-
ties to explain the return of young educated workers to higher density residential
areas in American cities. In turn, the increased concentration of educated workers
appears to foster the development of new local amenities. This recent work is in
tension with more traditional estimations of the relationship between amenities and
city size building on Roback (1982), which suggest only a weak relationship between
city population and amenities (Albouy 2008). Better knowledge about the forma-
tion of amenities in cities is undoubtedly a priority.
16    Journal of Economic Perspectives




The Costs of Density

Land Prices, Housing Prices, Transport Costs, Congestion
      Theory has long hypothesized that as population and density increase in a city,
its benefits initially accumulate faster, but eventually, its costs dominate (Henderson
1974). Fujita and Thisse (2013) call this the “fundamental trade-off of spatial
economics,” because it explains both the existence of cities and their finite sizes.
However, compared to research on benefits of density, there is a paucity of research
on its costs, which Glaeser (2011) dubbed the “demons of density.”
      As a starting point, density brings an increase in land prices. For French urban
areas, Combes, Duranton, and Gobillon (2019) estimate an elasticity of land prices
at the city center with respect to their population of about 0.30. These compari-
sons across cities are made for a central location to make sure we compare likes
with likes. In and of itself, a higher price for land does not represent a cost for
society, but more expensive land elicits various responses. Some of these responses
do create social costs, such as the use of more expensive building technologies to
build higher or longer and slower trips as residents move further out and roads get
more congested. Let’s explore these costs in turn.
      More costly land provides incentives to build taller. Ahlfeldt and McMillen
(2018) estimate an elasticity of building height with respect to land prices of 0.30 for
residential buildings and 0.45 for commercial buildings in the city of Chicago circa
2000. Interestingly, this elasticity about doubled over 100 years as technology made
it easier to respond to high land costs by building taller. They note, however, that the
elasticity of built-up floorspace with respect to land prices is only about one-third
of the elasticity of building height because taller buildings are often surrounded by
less tall buildings, open space, and roadway.
      While taller buildings do provide more floorspace per unit of land, the marginal
cost of floorspace increases with building height. Ahlfeldt and McMillen (2018)
estimate elasticities of building cost per unit of floorspace with respect to building
height ranging from 0.25 for small buildings to well above unity for skyscrapers.
Tall buildings are not only costly to build; they also generate a range of recurring
costs, including direct costs to their users. For example, Liu, Rosenthal, and Strange
(2018) report that a typical tenant in a high-rise spends 23 minutes a day waiting for
or riding elevators—about the same time as a typical one-way commute to work.5
      A higher built-up density alleviates, but does not eliminate, the pressure created
by higher land prices on the price of residences and offices. For French urban
areas, Combes, Duranton, and Gobillon (2019) estimate an elasticity of housing
prices at the city center with respect to their population of 0.11, compared with the




5
  Liu, Rosenthal, and Strange (2018) also report some countervailing benefits. For instance, the top
floors in tall buildings command higher rents than all but the street-level, suggesting that poorer acces-
sibility relative to lower floors is more than offset by better views and perhaps more prestige.
                                                              Gilles Duranton and Diego Puga            17




aforementioned 0.30 for land.6 For US metropolitan areas, Duranton and Puga
(2019) estimate a slightly lower elasticity of housing rents at the center of 0.07.
Overall, higher demand for land at particularly desirable locations leads to an
increase in floorspace density, higher prices for land and floorspace, and lower
consumption of floorspace per person. These forces push towards an increase in
human density per unit of land. Earlier, we provided an estimate of the elasticity of
density with respect to population for US metropolitan areas of 0.51. In addition
to lowering their housing consumption, residents also react to higher housing
prices by moving to cheaper, less-accessible locations. When we estimate the elas-
ticity of average distance to the center with respect to city population, we get 0.30.7
      The trade-off between housing costs and transport costs has been at the heart
of land-use modeling since the pioneering work of Alonso (1964), Muth (1969),
and Mills (1967). However, this early work used a monocentric model of cities,
which both captures many essential features of actual cities and also has important
shortcomings. Most notably, residents in the basic monocentric model only travel
to commute to their job, and they all work at the center. However, because not all
travel is travel to work and not all commutes reach the center of cities, average
travel increases with a city’s population by far less than predicted by the monocen-
tric model. Using transport data for US metropolitan areas, Duranton and Puga
(2019) estimate that the elasticity of vehicle kilometers traveled with respect to the
distance to the city of a resident household is only about 0.07. However, one key
property of the monocentric model continues to hold. As households consider resi-
dences further away from the center, the lower price of the housing should be just
offset by higher transport cost. Indeed, Duranton and Puga (2019) find that, just
as predicted by the model, the elasticity of housing prices with respect to distance
to the center is exactly the same as the elasticity of transport costs with respect to
distance to the center, but with an opposite sign.
      This literature suggests that cities that allow their urban fringe to expand may
have more success in containing urban costs. Combes, Duranton, and Gobillon
(2019) estimate the elasticity of land and housing prices at the center of French
metropolitan areas with respect to either their density or their population. For
housing prices, they estimate a density elasticity of 0.21 and a population elasticity
of 0.11. For land prices, the density elasticity is 0.60 and the population elasticity
0.30. Since an increase in density is essentially an increase in population keeping


6
  In their model, Combes, Duranton, and Gobillon (2019) show that the ratio of the land price elasticity
to the housing price elasticity should be equal to the share of land in construction. For France, this ratio
of 0.11/0.30=0.37 is very close to the share of land in the construction of single-family homes.
7
  To estimate the elasticity of average distance to the center with respect to city population, we first
determine the location of the center of each metropolitan area from the location of its core munici-
pality reported by Google Maps. We then compute for each metropolitan area, the population-weighted
average distance to the center of its Census block groups using five-year 2008–2012 data from the 2012
American Community Survey obtained from the IPUMS-NHGIS project (Manson et al. 2019). We finally
regress the log of average distance on the log of population across metropolitan areas using ordinary
least squares.
18   Journal of Economic Perspectives




built-up area constant, these differences indicate that if cities could only increase
their population by increasing density, house prices would increase by twice as
much in the long run, with even more substantial short-term price hikes.
      As a city both gets denser and expands outwards, population growth also puts
a strain on its infrastructure, and particularly, its transport infrastructure. Urban
travel gets slower as congestion worsens. Duranton and Puga (2019) estimate an
elasticity of travel speed with respect to city population of −0.04 for US metropol-
itan areas using travel survey information. For cities in India, Akbar et al. (2019)
estimate the same elasticity using travel time data from Google Maps and obtain a
similar figure of −0.05.
      When discussing the benefits of density, we included some endogenous changes
in amenities, such as more consumption opportunities. Other amenity changes associ-
ated with density may instead constitute a cost. For instance, Glaeser and Sacerdote
(1999) estimate that the elasticity of crime with respect to population for US cities
is 0.16 if one focuses only on reported crime and 0.24 when one takes into account
greater crime underreporting in larger cities. They find that, while the higher prev-
alence of crime-prone individuals in large cities plays an important role, almost as
important is the fact that higher urban density makes finding a victim for opportunistic
crimes easier and catching criminals more difficult. However, it is intriguing to note
that in Europe, larger cities tend to suffer less crime (Ahlfeldt and Pietrostefani 2019).
      We discussed earlier that density can also increase exposure to pollution from
particulates, negatively affecting health. Historically, high density was also synony-
mous with frequent premature deaths caused by the poor hygiene of cities and the
ease at which epidemics would propagate. Bairoch (1988) reports that early in the
nineteenth century, rural youth were expected to live eight to twelve years longer
than urban youth. In Europe and North America, urban life expectancy only over-
took rural life expectancy after 1930. Urban planners tried to alleviate the burden of
disease in cities not only by investing in water and sewage systems but also by building
wider avenues and large urban parks and introducing regulations that limited over-
crowding and improved air circulation and access to natural light (Colomina 2019).
If cities are not denser today, it is partly a consequence of past diseases. And yet, the
lack of social distancing that cities promote—and which gives them so many advan-
tages—also makes them more vulnerable to pandemics even today.
      While the literature on urban costs remains limited, it offers three tentative
conclusions. First, the various elasticities reported here provide support for a hill-
shaped relationship between the net benefits of cities and their population scale
and density. Second, the top of this hill is fairly flat, so that the costs of being
moderately undersized or oversized are small. Finally, the downward-sloping part
of the net benefits may eventually fall steeply and more so if cities cannot adjust
at both the intensive (densification) and extensive (outwards expansion)margins.

Aggregating the Costs of Density and Population
    Quantifying urban costs, in all their forms, is complicated. As one example, the
multiple components of commuting costs are hard to observe and even harder to
                                                             The Economics of Urban Density          19




value (Small 2012). Housing costs, despite being transfers from users to owners, are
also expected to capitalize many other costs. Moreover, housing and transport costs
vary across locations in a city.
     To assess overall urban costs, the literature has developed three approaches.
A first strategy uses a standard urban model that also includes agglomeration
benefits. For example, Au and Henderson (2006) solve such a model to obtain an
expression for average value added in a city as a function of its population. They
also estimate the relationship between value added per worker and city population
for Chinese cities during a period in which migration was greatly restricted and
conclude that many of these cities were grossly undersized. The great advantage
of this approach is that it requires little data—essentially just population and value
added. However, it also has several drawbacks. The key fundamental relationship
between agglomeration benefits and urban costs is expected to be hill-shaped,
and the shape of the hill will be hard to estimate unless many cities are far from
their optimal size, as in China in the 1990s. Also, it is unclear which urban costs
are reflected in lower value added (for example, commuting costs paid in the
time of workers will be missed, while the higher market activity of transit firms in
congested cities may result in higher value added).
     The second approach models the choices of a consumer who needs to decide
on a residential location and asks how much more costly it would be to achieve the
same level of utility at the same location should the city become denser or grow
in population. Using this approach, Combes, Duranton, and Gobillon (2019)
assume that households have free mobility and leverage the insight that house
prices will capitalize transport costs and amenities. As a result, the elasticity of
urban costs with respect to city population turns out to be equal to the elasticity of
house prices at the center of cities with respect to their population multiplied by
the share of housing in household expenditure. As mentioned earlier, Combes,
Duranton, and Gobillon (2019) also estimate that the elasticity of housing prices
with respect to city density is 0.11 and fairly stable over the range of city popula-
tions observed in France. The share of income devoted to housing increases with
urban population, from about 16 percent in a city with 100,000 inhabitants to
39 percent in a city like Paris. Taken together, these figures are indicative of urban
cost elasticities associated with a greater density ranging from 0.03 for smaller
cities to 0.08 for cities with more than ten million inhabitants. The main draw-
backs of this approach are that it relies heavily on the free-mobility condition to
simplify a wide array of changes associated with greater density, that it considers
only monetary costs, and that it ignores endogenous amenities (whether positive
or negative).
     A third approach, developed by Duranton and Puga (2019), models the various
costs of cities explicitly and estimates the parameters associated with these costs.8

8
  Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg (2013) propose a related approach with a quantified model. The model is
then used to assess the effects of shutting down various forms of heterogeneity across cities rather than
exploring the costs and benefits of increased density or rising population.
20   Journal of Economic Perspectives




One advantage of this approach is that the key urban costs elasticity can be esti-
mated based on equations of the model at three different levels of aggregation and
using three different sources of variation. These approaches amount to estimating
the assumed commuting cost equation (using within-city variation in travel distance
across individuals), the spatial equilibrium within each city (using within-city varia-
tion in house prices across locations), and the spatial equilibrium across cities
(using cross-city variation in city-center house prices). All three approaches result
in a similar elasticity of urban costs with respect to city population of about 0.07.
These urban costs are then further amplified by congestion with a population elas-
ticity that they estimate at about 0.04. The main drawback relative to the previous
approaches is that the modeling and data demands are even greater.


Getting Closer to Optimal Density?

The Unhappy Welfare Economics of Density
      When considering the benefits and costs from density in a location, firms
and workers choose based on their private benefits and costs, not on the social
benefits and costs. There are two wedges between private and social that tend to
push toward suboptimally low levels of density. The agglomeration wedge refers
to the fact that firms and workers consider the agglomeration spillovers they may
receive from others nearby, but not the agglomeration spillovers they may provide
to others. Another wedge arises from the capitalization of land prices. When the
land is not owned by local residents, a fraction of the net benefits from density are
transferred away as rents to absentee landowners who benefit from agglomeration
without contributing to it. On the other side, there is a congestion wedge pushing
toward suboptimally high levels of density because the marginal cost of congestion
exceeds its average.
      The overall effect of these three wedges is ambiguous. We did report above
that with respect to density, the congestion elasticity is estimated to be higher than
the agglomeration elasticity. However, the smaller agglomeration elasticity pertains
to the labor income of residents choosing a location, whereas the larger conges-
tion elasticity pertains to their travel costs, which are much smaller than labor
income. Much less is known about the wedge from land capitalization. Here, the
key issue is not who owns the land, but whether agents making decisions about
local density bear the full costs and benefits of such decisions. To complicate the
welfare economics problem further, the development of high density over a suffi-
cient spatial scale is subject to “all-or-nothing” decisions: That is, no firm may want
to move to a newly-developed location unless other firms are expected to move as
well. Large-scale development also often requires coordination among developers
(Henderson 1974; Henderson and Mitra 1996), but the market for large-scale devel-
opment is absent or limited in most of the world, and it remains limited in the
United States. This coordination failure implies there might be too few communi-
ties and, as a result, they may be overly dense.
                                                             Gilles Duranton and Diego Puga            21




     Putting together the near-absence of a market to provide density at scale and
the various externalities associated with location decisions, it seems unlikely that the
factors will precisely counterbalance each other in ways that cause market forces to
provide optimal density.

The Unhappy Politics of Density
      Almost everywhere in the world, land use is heavily regulated with a view to
determine overall density as well as specific types of density (of people, jobs, shops,
green space, and others).9 A commonly heard criticism is that land-use policies tend
to deliver suboptimally low levels of density. For example, many land-use policies
aim to reduce densities through instruments such as minimum lot sizes, maximum
floor-area ratios, or single-family residential zoning. Such policies are particularly
prevalent in the United States, where land zoned for detached single-family homes
accounts for 94 percent of all land zoned for residential use in San José, 81 percent
in Seattle, 75 percent in Los Angeles, and 70 percent in Minneapolis, although only
36 percent in Washington, DC and 15 percent in New York (Badger and Bui 2019).
      Many reasons have been suggested for restrictive zoning: 1) a fear by the rich
that poorer residents will free-ride on public amenities (in particular, high-quality
public schools) by consuming a small quantity of housing in a rich jurisdiction
(Tiebout 1956; Fischel 1987); 2) a fear by risk-averse incumbents that less restrictive
zoning would harm property values (Fischel 2001); 3) the possibility that costs of
increasing density are more short-term and highly local, while the benefits may take
more time to accrue and diffuse across the metropolitan area; 4) when there are
strong preferences for particular locations, incumbent residents can act as monop-
olies restricting entry (Ortalo-Magné and Prat 2014; Hilber and Robert-Nicoud
2013); and 5) incumbent residents seeking to limit entry into particularly produc-
tive cities, thus maximizing their own welfare at the expense of potential newcomers
(for a model, see Duranton and Puga 2019).
      Overall, the main cost of overly restrictive land-use regulations for society may
result from a spatial misallocation of population. Using very different models to
quantify the social losses from excessive regulation, Hsieh and Moretti (2019) and
Duranton and Puga (2019) both suggest that relaxing planning regulations in the
three most productive US cities to the median level might generate large aggre-
gate real gains of about 8 percent. How much of these gains can be realized would
depend greatly on how rapidly urban costs increase as some cities grow well beyond
their currently observed sizes. Nevertheless, these quantitative assessments strongly
indicate that observed densities are far from optimal—too low in some places and
too high in others.


9
  Given our focus, we do not discuss policy interventions that try to get firms or people to relocate over
large distances, even if the density of origin and destination can be quite different. For a starting point
to this work, see the papers on place-based policies in this issue, including Bartik on US policies and
Overman and von Ehrlich on European policies. See Duranton and Venables (2018) for detailed discus-
sions of place-based policies in developing countries.
22   Journal of Economic Perspectives




Conclusion

      Over the last ten years, the study of urban density has been revitalized by
the arrival of new fine-grained data. We are increasingly able to observe key links
such as face-to-face interactions for learning spillovers. Granular data about job
searches and matching in cities or trades between firms are also increasingly avail-
able. Significant modeling advances have also taken place during the last decade.
A new generation of general-equilibrium urban models has come of age, and
their main novelty lies in their ability to handle the heterogeneity we observe
in the distribution of jobs and residences. New models have been developed to
distinguish between the agglomeration, selection, and sorting effects of density;
to model job changes within and between cities; to provide better estimates of the
costs of density; and so on. There is less to report on the front of causal identifica-
tion during the last ten years. There has been a lot of empirical work around the
issues surrounding urban density. However, it pushed more-or-less along the same
lines as previously, with a continued emphasis on instrumental-variable estima-
tions, the use of difference-in-difference after a plausibly exogenous shock, and
the exploitation of spatial discontinuities.
      Thus, as we look forward to future progress on the economics of urban density,
our wish list includes novel data explorations providing a richer set of facts related
to the manifestations of density, models that integrate urban mobility and consider
the dynamics of buildings and construction, and rising empirical standards in the
identification of causal effects.
      As we read one last time the preprint version of this article while we are confined
in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the costs we incur and the benefits we
receive by seeking proximity during normal times in dense urban environments
have become even more prominent. The streets are free from congested vehicle
traffic and the sky is unusually clear from pollution. At the same time, we miss the
ideas that often arise from serendipitous encounters with our colleagues and the
concentration and sanity of separate office and home environments. For many, the
sudden drop in economic activity has brought much deeper troubles.
      Beyond the temporary quietness, the immediate prominence of the costs and
benefits of density, and the impact of the emerging economic crisis, what will be the
long-run consequences of this virus for our densest cities? Pandemics have hit cities
the hardest for centuries, and cities have adapted and been shaped by them—from
investments in water and sewage systems to prevent cholera, to urban planning to
reduce overcrowding and improve air circulation and access to sunlight in response
to tuberculosis. Maybe temporary social distancing measures will also leave a perma-
nent footprint on cities—for instance, in the form of more space for pedestrians
and bicycles or a gain of outdoor versus indoor leisure environments. But the idea
that this pandemic will change cities forever is likely an overstretch. Cities are full
of inertia and this crisis has stressed both the costs and benefits of density. Confine-
ment is forcing us to see both the advantages and the great limitations of online
meetings relative to the more subtle and unplanned in-person exchanges. It has
                                                              The Economics of Urban Density          23




made us realize that many tasks are impossible to do from home. At schools and
universities, the haphazard transition to online courses may speed up their develop-
ment, or it may delay it as many students have become frustrated by losing aspects of
a full educational experience. For a while, some people may try to avoid dense cities
for fear of contagion, but others may be drawn to them seeking work opportunities
in difficult times. Perhaps one persisting lesson is that the cost of the pandemic has
so far been associated more with urban inequalities than with urban density. While
the consequences are hardest for lower-income households and minorities, they
affect us all in profound ways.


■  Puga gratefully acknowledges funding from the European Research Council under
the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Programme (ERC Advanced Grant agreement
695107—DYNURBAN) and from Spain’s Ministry of Science and Innovation (grants
ECO2016-80411-P and PRX19-00578), as well as the support and hospitality of the
Wharton School’s Department of Real Estate during his visit as Judith C. and William G.
Bollinger Visiting Professor. We are grateful to Gordon Hanson, Enrico Moretti, Frédéric
Robert-Nicoud, Timothy Taylor, and Heidi Williams for very helpful feedback and to Yan Hu,
Claudio Luccioletti and Giorgio Pietrabissa for research assistance.




References

Agarwal, Sumit, J. Bradford Jensen, and Ferdinando Monte. 2019. “The Geography of Consumption.”
      Unpublished.
Ahlfeldt, Gabriel M., Stephen J. Redding, Daniel Sturm, and Nikolaus Wolf. 2015. “The Economics of
      Density: Evidence from the Berlin Wall.” Econometrica 83 (6): 2127–89.
Ahlfeldt, Gabriel M., and Daniel P. McMillen. 2018. “Tall Buildings and Land Values: Height and
      Construction Cost Elasticities in Chicago, 1870–2010.” Review of Economics and Statistics 100 (5):
      861–75.
Ahlfeldt, Gabriel M., and Elisabetta Pietrostefani. 2019. “The Economic Effects of Density: A Synthesis.”
      Journal of Urban Economics 111 (1): 93–107.
Akbar, Prottoy A., Victor Couture, Gilles Duranton, Ejaz Ghani, and Adam Storeygard. 2019. “Mobility
      and Congestion in Urban India.” Policy Research Paper 8546.
Albouy, David. 2008. “Are Big Cities Really Bad Places to Live? Improving Quality-of-Life Estimates across
      Cities.” NBER Working Paper 14472.
Alonso, William. 1964. Location and Land Use; Toward a General Theory of Land Rent. Cambridge, MA:
      Harvard University Press.
Atkin, David, Keith Chen, and Anton Popov. 2019. “The Returns to Face-to-Face Interactions: Knowl-
      edge Spillovers in Silicon Valley.” Unpublished.
Au, Chun-Chung, and J. Vernon Henderson. 2006. “Are Chinese Cities Too Small?” The Review of Economic
      Studies 73 (3): 549–76.
Audretsch, David B., and Maryann P. Feldman. 1996. “R&D Spillovers and the Geography of Innovation
      and Production.” American Economic Review 86 (3): 630–40.
Badger, Emily, and Quoctrung Bui. 2019. “Cities Start to Question an American Ideal: A House with a Yard
      on Every Lot.” The New York Times , June 18. https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/06/18/
      upshot/cities-across-america-question-single-family-zoning.html.
24     Journal of Economic Perspectives



Bairoch, Paul. 1988. Cities and Economic Development: From the Dawn of History to the Present. Translated by
      Christopher Braider. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Baragwanath-Vogel, Kathryn, Ran Goldblatt, Gordon Hanson, and Amit K. Khandelwal. Forthcoming.
      “Mixing Satellite Imagery to Define Urban Markets: An Application to India.” Journal of Urban
      Economics.
Baum-Snow, Nathaniel, and Ronni Pavan. 2012. “Understanding the City Size Wage Gap.” Review of
      Economic Studies 79 (1): 88–127.
de Bellefon, Marie-Pierre, Pierre-Philippe Combes, Gilles Duranton, Laurent Gobillon, and Clément
      Gorin. Forthcoming. “Delineating Urban Areas Using Building Density.” Journal of Urban Economics.
Ben-Akiva, Moshe and Steven R. Lerman. 1985. Discrete Choice Analysis: Theory and Application to Travel
      Demand. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Berliant, Marcus, Robert R. Reed, III, and Ping Wang. 2006. “Knowledge Exchange, Matching, and
      Agglomeration.” Journal of Urban Economics 60 (1): 69–95.
Bernard, Andrew B., Andreas Moxnes, and Yukiko U. Saito. 2019. “Production Networks, Geography,
      and Firm Performance.” Journal of Political Economy 127 (2): 639–88.
Berry, Christopher R., and Edward L. Glaeser. 2005. “The Divergence of Human Capital Levels across
      Cities.” Papers in Regional Science 84 (3): 407–44.
Büchel, Konstantin, and Maximilian V. Ehrlich. 2016. “Cities and the Structure of Social Interactions:
      Evidence from Mobile Phone Data.” Univeristy of Bern Discussion Paper 1608.
Büchel, Konstantin, Maximilian V. Ehrlich, Diego Puga, and Elisabet Viladecans-Marsal. 2019. “Calling
      from the Outside: The role of Networks in Residential Mobility.” CEPR Discussion Paper DP13615.
Carlino, Gerald A., Satyajit Chatterjee, and Robert M. Hunt. 2007. “Urban Density and the Rate of
      Invention.” Journal of Urban Economics 61 (3): 389–419.
Carlino, Gerald, and William R. Kerr. 2015. “Agglomeration and Innovation.” In Handbook of Regional
      and Urban Economics, volume 5A, edited by Gilles Duranton, J. Vernon Henderson, and William
      Strange, 349–404. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Carozzi, Felipe, and Sefi Roth. 2019. “Dirty Density: Air Quality and the Density of American Cities.”
      Centre for Economic Performance, Discussion Paper 1635.
Charlot, Sylvie, and Gilles Duranton. 2006. “Cities and Workplace Communication: Some Quantitative
      French Evidence.” Urban Studies 43 (8): 1365–94.
Charlot, Sylvie, and Gilles Duranton. 2004. “Communication Externalities in Cities.” Journal of Urban
      Economics 56 (3): 581–613.
Ciccone, Antonio, and Robert E. Hall. 1996. “Productivity and the Density of Economic Activity.”
      American Economic Review 86 (1): 54–70.
Combes, Pierre-Philippe, Gilles Duranton, and Laurent Gobillon. 2008. “Spatial Wage Disparities:
      Sorting Matters!” Journal of Urban Economics 63 (2): 723–42.
Combes, Pierre-Philippe, Gilles Duranton, and Laurent Gobillon. 2019. “The Costs of Agglomeration:
      House and Land Prices in French Cities.” Review of Economic Studies 86 (4): 1556–89.
Combes, Pierre-Philippe, Gilles Duranton, Laurent Gobillon, Diego Puga, and Sébastien Roux. 2012.
      “The Productivity Advantages of Large Cities: Distinguishing Agglomeration from Firm Selection.”
      Econometrica 80 (6): 2543–94.
Combes, Pierre-Philippe, Gilles Duranton, Laurent Gobillon, and Sébastien Roux. 2010. “Estimating
      Agglomeration Economies with History, Geology, and Worker Fixed-Effects.” In Agglomeration
      Economics, edited by Edward L. Glaeser, 15–65. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Combes, Pierre-Philippe, and Laurent Gobillon. 2015. “The Empirics of Agglomeration Economies.”
      In Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, volume 5b, edited by Gilles Duranton, J. Vernon
      Henderson, and William Strange, 247–348. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Couture, Victor. 2016. “Valuing the consumption benefits of urban density.” Unpublished.
Couture, Victor, and Jessie Handbury. 2019. “Urban revival in America.” Unpublished.
Dauth, Wolfgang, Sebastian Findeisen, Enrico Moretti, and Jens Südekum. 2018. “Matching in Cities.”
      NBER Working Paper 25227.
Davis, Donald R., Jonathan I. Dingel, Joan Monras, and Eduardo Morales. 2019. “How Segregated Is
      Urban Consumption?” Journal of Political Economy 127 (4): 1684–1738.
De la Roca, Jorge, and Diego Puga. 2017. “Learning by Working in Big Cities.” Review of Economic Studies
      84 (1): 106–42.
Desmet, Klaus, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2013. “Urban Accounting and Welfare.” American Economic
      Review 103 (6): 2296–2327.
                                                               Gilles Duranton and Diego Puga            25



Diamond, Rebecca. 2016. “The Determinants and Welfare Implications of US workers’ Diverging Loca-
      tion Choices by Skill: 1980–2000.” American Economic Review 106 (3): 479–524.
Donaldson, Dave, and Adam Storeygard. 2016. “The View from Above: Applications of Satellite Data in
      Economics.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 30 (4): 171–98.
Duranton, Gilles, and Diego Puga. 2004. “Micro-foundations of Urban Agglomeration Economies.” In
      Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, volume 4, edited by J. Vernon Henderson and Jacques-
      François Thisse, 2063–2117. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Duranton, Gilles and Diego Puga. 2019. “Urban Growth and Its Aggregate Implications.” NBER
      Working Paper 26591.
Duranton, Gilles and Matthew A. Turner. 2018. “Urban Form and Driving: Evidence from US Cities.”
      Journal of Urban Economics 108 (1): 171–191.
Duranton, Gilles, and Anthony J. Venables. 2018. “Place-based Policies for Development.” NBER Working
      Paper 24562.
Ellison, Glenn, Edward L. Glaeser, and William Kerr. 2010. “What Causes Industry Agglomeration?
      Evidence from Coagglomeration Patterns.” American Economic Review 100 (3): 1195–1213.
Fischel, William A. 1987. The Economics of Zoning Laws: A Property Rights Approach to American Land Use
      Controls. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Fischel, William A. 2001. The Homevoter Hypothesis. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Fujita, Masahisa, and Jacques-François Thisse. 2013. Economics of Agglomeration: Cities, Industrial Location,
      and Globalization. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gaubert, Cecile. 2018. “Firm Sorting and Agglomeration.” American Economic Review 108 (11): 3117– 53.
Glaeser, Edward L. 2011. Triumph of the City: How Our Greatest Invention Makes Us Richer, Smarter, Greener,
      Healthier, and Happier. London: MacMillan.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Matthew E. Kahn. 2010. “The Greenness of Cities: Carbon Dioxide Emissions
      and Urban Development.” Journal of Urban Economics 67 (3): 404–18.
Glaeser, Edward L., and David C. Maré. 2001. “Cities and Skills.” Journal of Labor Economics 19 (2): 316–42.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Bruce Sacerdote. 1999. “Why Is There More Crime in Cities?” Journal of Political
      Economy 107 (S6): S225–S58.
Graham, Daniel J. 2007. “Agglomeration, Productivity and Transport Investment.” Journal of Transport
      Economics and Policy 41 (3): 317–43.
Greenstone, Michael, Richard Hornbeck, and Enrico Moretti. 2010. “Identifying Agglomeration Spill-
      overs: Evidence from Winners and Losers of Large Plant Openings.” Journal of Political Economy
      118 (3): 536–98.
Handbury, Jessie and David E. Weinstein. 2015. “Goods Prices and Availability in Cities.” Review of
      Economic Studies 82 (1): 258–96.
Harari, Mariaflavia. Forthcoming. “Cities in Bad Shape: Urban Geometry in India.” American Economic
      Review.
Henderson, J. Vernon. 1974. “The Sizes and Types of Cities.” American Economic Review 64 (4): 640–56.
Henderson, J. Vernon. 2003. “Marshall’s Scale Economies.” Journal of Urban Economics 53 (1): 1–28.
Henderson, J. Vernon, Sebastian Kriticos, and Jamila Nigmatulina. Forthcoming. “Measuring Urban
      Economic Density.” Journal of Urban Economics.
Henderson, J. Vernon, and Arindam Mitra. 1996. “The New Urban Landscape: Developers and Edge
      Cities.” Regional Science and Urban Economics 26 (6): 613–43.
Hilber, Christian, and Frédéric Robert-Nicoud. 2013. “On the Origins of Land Use Regulations: Theory
      and Evidence from US Metro Areas.” Journal of Urban Economics 75 (1): 29–43.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Enrico Moretti. 2019. “Housing Constraints and Spatial Misallocation.” American
      Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 11 (2): 1–39.
Jaffe, Adam B., Manuel Trajtenberg, and Rebecca Henderson. 1993. “Geographic Localization of Knowl-
      edge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 (3): 577–98.
Koster, Hans R.A., Ilias Pasidis, and Jos van Ommeren. 2019. “Shopping Externalities and Retail Concen-
      tration: Evidence from Dutch Shopping Streets.” Journal of Urban Economics 114 (1): 103–94.
Kreindler, Gabriel E., and Yuhei Miyauchi. 2019. “Measuring Commuting and Economic Activity inside
      Cities with Cell Phone Records.” Unpublished.
Krugman, Paul R. 1991. Geography and Trade. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Leyk, Stefan, Andrea E. Gaughan, Susana B. Adamo, Alex de Sherbinin, Deborah Balk, Sergio Freire,
      Amy Rose, Forrest R. Stevens, Brian Blankespoor, Charlie Frye, Joshua Comenetz, Alessandro
      Sorichetta, Kytt MacManus, Linda Pistolesi, Marc Levy, Andrew J. Tatem, and Martino Pesaresi.
26    Journal of Economic Perspectives



      2019. “The Spatial Allocation of Population: A Review of Large-Scale Gridded Population Data
      Products and Their Fitness for Use.” Earth System Science Data 11 (3): 1385–1409.
Liu, Crocker H., Stuart S. Rosenthal, and William C. Strange. 2018. “The Vertical City: Rent Gradients,
      Spatial Structure, and Agglomeration Economies.” Journal of Urban Economics 106 (1): 101–22.
Manning, Alan, and Barbara Petrongolo. 2017. “How Local Are Labor Markets? Evidence from a Spatial
      Job Search Model.” American Economic Review 107 (10): 2877–2907.
Manson, Steven, Jonathan Schroeder, David Van Riper, and Steven Ruggles. 2019. “Integrated Public
      Use Microdata Series, National Historical Geographic Information System: Version 14.0.”
      IPUMS, Minneapolis, Minnesota. http://doi.org/10.18128/D050.V14.0
Marinescu, Ioana, and Roland Rathelot. 2018. “Mismatch Unemployment and the Geography of Job
      Search.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 10 (3): 42–70.
Melo, Patricia C., Daniel J. Graham, and Robert B. Noland. 2009. “A Meta-Analysis of Estimates of Urban
      Agglomeration Economies.” Regional Science and Urban Economics 39 (3): 332–42.
Mills, Edwin S. 1967. “An Aggregative Model of Resource Allocation in a Metropolitan Area.” American
      Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 57 (2): 197–210.
Moretti, Enrico. 2004. “Estimating the Social Return to Higher Education: Evidence from Longitudinal
      and Repeated Cross-Sectional Data.” Journal of Econometrics 121 (1–2): 175–212.
Moretti, Enrico. 2011. “Local Labor Markets.” In Handbook of Labor Economics, volume 4, edited by Orley
      Ashenfelter and David Card, 1237–1313. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Moretti, Enrico. 2013. “Real Wage Inequality.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5 (1): 65–103.
Moretti, Enrico. 2019. The Effect of High-Tech Clusters on the Productivity of Top Inventors. NBER Working
      Paper 26270.
Muth, Richard F. 1969. Cities and Housing: The Spatial Pattern of Urban Residential Land Use. Chicago:
      University of Chicago Press.
Ortalo-Magné, François, and Andrea Prat. 2014. “On the Political Economy of Urban Growth: Home-
      ownership versus Affordability.” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 6 (1): 154–81.
Overman, Henry G., and Diego Puga. 2010. “Labour Pooling as a Source of Agglomeration: An Empirical
      Investigation.” In Agglomeration Economics, edited by Edward L. Glaeser, 133–50. Chicago: Chicago
      University Press.
Puga, Diego. 2010. “The Magnitude and Causes of Agglomeration Economies.” Journal of Regional Science
      50 (1): 203–19.
Redding, Stephen J., and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2017. “Quantitative Spatial Economics.” Annual
      Review of Economics 9 (1): 21–58.
Roback, Jennifer. 1982. “Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life.” Journal of Political Economy 90 (6):
      1257–78.
Rosenthal, Stuart S., and William Strange. 2004. “Evidence on the Nature and Sources of Agglomeration
      Economies.” In Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, volume 4, edited by J. Vernon Henderson
      and Jacques-François Thisse, 2119–71. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Rosenthal, Stuart S., and William C. Strange. 2001. “The Determinants of Agglomeration.” Journal of
      Urban Economics 50 (1): 191–229.
Rosenthal, Stuart S., and William C. Strange. 2008. “The Attenuation of Human Capital Spillovers.”
      Journal of Urban Economics 64 (2): 373–89.
Small, Kenneth A. 2012. “Valuation of Travel Time.” Economics of Transportation 1(1–2): 2–14.
Sveikauskas, Leo. 1975. “Productivity of Cities.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 89 (3): 393–413.
US Bureau of the Census. 2011. “Intercensal Estimates of the Resident Population for Counties and
      States: April 1, 2000 to July 1, 2010.”
Tiebout, Charles M. 1956. “A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures.” Journal of Political Economy 64 (5):
      416–24.
WorldPop. 2013. “Global High Resolution Population Denominators Project.” University of South-
      ampton. https://www.worldpop.org.
Xiao, Hong Yu and Andy Wu. 2020. “Commuting and Innovation: Are Closer Inventors More Produc-
      tive?” Unpublished.
