[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: journal/T07-krugman-1991-increasing-returns-and-economic-geography-10.1086-261763.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Title:           Increasing Returns and Economic Geography
Subject:         Journal of Political Economy 1991.99:483-499
Author:          Paul Krugman
Producer:        iText 2.0.1 (by lowagie.com)
CreationDate:    Sun Dec  2 00:07:37 2007 WIB
ModDate:         Fri Aug  5 05:09:48 2016 WIB
Custom Metadata: no
Metadata Stream: no
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            none
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           17
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       408 x 636 pts
Page rot:        0
File size:       234084 bytes
Optimized:       no
PDF version:     1.5
[Extracted Text]
  Increasing Returns and Economic Geography




  Paul Krugman
  MassachusettsInstitute of Technology




        This paper develops a simple model that shows how a country can
        endogenously become differentiated into an industrialized "core"
        and an agricultural "periphery." In order to realize scale economies
        while minimizing transport costs, manufacturing firms tend to locate
        in the region with larger demand, but the location of demand itself
        depends on the distribution of manufacturing. Emergence of a
        core-periphery pattern depends on transportation costs, economies
        of scale, and the share of manufacturing in national income.



  The study of economic geography-of           the location of factors of pro-
  duction in space-occupies       a relatively small part of standard eco-
  nomic analysis. International trade theory, in particular, convention-
  ally treats nations as dimensionless      points (and frequently assumes
  zero transportation    costs between countries as well). Admittedly,
  models descended from von Thunen (1826) play an important role
  in urban studies, while Hotelling-type      models of locational competi-
  tion get a reasonable degree of attention in industrial organization.
  On the whole, however, it seems fair to say that the study of economic
  geography plays at best a marginal role in economic theory.
     On the face of it, this neglect is surprising. The facts of economic
  geography are surely among the most striking features of real-world
  economies, at least to laymen. For example, one of the most remark-
  able things about the United States is that in a generally sparsely
  populated country, much of whose land is fertile, the bulk of the
  population resides in a few clusters of metropolitan areas; a quarter
  of the inhabitants are crowded into a not especially inviting section
  of the East Coast. It has often been noted that nighttime satellite


  [Journal of Political Economy, 1991, vol. 99, no. 3]
  ? 1991 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0022-3808/91/9903-0005$01.50


                                                      483


                This content downloaded from 141.218.001.105 on August 04, 2016 15:09:48 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
 484                                                JOURNAL      OF POLITICAL       ECONOMY

 photos of Europe reveal little of political boundaries but clearly sug-
 gest a center-periphery pattern whose hub is somewhere in or near
 Belgium. A layman might have expected that these facts would play
 a key role in economic modeling. Yet the study of economic geogra-
 phy, at least within the economics profession, has lain largely dormant
 for the past generation (with a few notable exceptions, particularly
 Arthur [1989, 1990] and David [in press]).
    The purpose of this paper is to suggest that application of models
 and techniques derived from theoretical industrial organization now
 allows a reconsideration of economic geography, that it is now time
 to attempt to incorporate the insights of the long but informal tradi-
 tion in this area into formal models. In order to make the point, the
 paper develops a simple illustrative model designed to shed light on
 one of the key questions of location: Why and when does manufactur-
 ing become concentrated in a few regions, leaving others relatively
 undeveloped?
    What we shall see is that it is possible to develop a very simple
 model of geographical concentration of manufacturing based on the
 interaction of economies of scale with transportation costs. This is
 perhaps not too surprising, given the kinds of results that have been
 emerging in recent literature (with Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny
 [1989a, 1989b] perhaps the closest parallel). More interesting is the
 fact that this concentration of manufacturing in one location need
 not always happen and that whether it does depends in an interesting
 way on a few key parameters.
    The paper is divided into four sections. Section I sets the stage with
 an informal discussion of the problem. Section II then sets out the
 analytical model. In Section III, I analyze the determination of short-
 run equilibrium and dynamics. Section IV analyzes the conditions
 under which concentration of manufacturing production does and
 does not occur.

  I.   Bases for Regional Divergence
  There has been fairly extensive discussion over time of the nature
  of the externalities that lead to localization of particular industries.
  Indeed, Alfred Marshall's original exposition of the concept of exter-
  nal economies was illustrated with the example of industry localiza-
  tion. Most of the literature in this area follows Marshall in identifying
  three reasons for localization. First, the concentration of several firms
  in a single location offers a pooled market for workers with industry-
  specific skills, ensuring both a lower probability of unemployment
  and a lower probability of labor shortage. Second, localized industries
  can support the production of nontradable specialized inputs. Third,



                This content downloaded from 141.218.001.105 on August 04, 2016 15:09:48 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
  INCREASING      RETURNS                                                                   485
  informational spillovers can give clustered firms a better production
  function than isolated producers. (Hoover [1948] gives a particularly
  clear discussion of agglomeration economies.)
     These accounts of industry localization surely have considerable
  validity. In this paper, however, I shall offer a somewhat different
  approach aimed at answering a somewhat different question. Instead
  of asking why a particular industry is concentrated in a particular
  area-for example, carpets in Dalton, Georgia-I shall ask why man-
  ufacturing in general might end up concentrated in one or a few
  regions of a country, with the remaining regions playing the "periph-
  eral" role of agricultural suppliers to the manufacturing "core." The
  proposed explanation correspondingly focuses on generalized exter-
  nal economies rather than those specific to a particular industry.
      I shall also adopt the working assumption that the externalities
  that sometimes lead to emergence of a core-periphery pattern are
  pecuniary externalities associated with either demand or supply link-
  ages rather than purely technological spillovers. In competitive gen-
  eral equilibrium, of course, pecuniary externalities have no welfare
  significance and could not lead to the kind of interesting dynamics
  we shall derive later. Over the past decade, however, it has become
  a familiar point that in the presence of imperfect competition and
  increasing returns, pecuniary externalities matter; for example, if one
  firm's actions affect the demand for the product of another firm
  whose price exceeds marginal cost, this is as much a "real" externality
  as if one firm's research and development spills over into the general
  knowledge pool. At the same time, by focusing on pecuniary external-
  ities, we are able to make the analysis much more concrete than if we
  allowed external economies to arise in some invisible form. (This is
   particularly true when location is at issue: how far does a technologi-
  cal spillover spill?)
      To understand the nature of the postulated pecuniary externalities,
   imagine a country in which there are two kinds of production, agri-
   culture and manufacturing. Agricultural production is characterized
  both by constant returns to scale and by intensive use of immobile
   land. The geographical distribution of this production will therefore
  be determined largely by the exogenous distribution of suitable land.
   Manufactures, on the other hand, we may suppose to be character-
   ized by increasing returns to scale and modest use of land.
      Where will manufactures production take place? Because of econo-
   mies of scale, production of each manufactured good will take place
   at only a limited number of sites. Other things equal, the preferred
   sites will be those with relatively large nearby demand, since produc-
   ing near one's main market minimizes transportation costs. Other
   locations will then be served from these centrally located sites.



                This content downloaded from 141.218.001.105 on August 04, 2016 15:09:48 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
  486                                               JOURNAL      OF POLITICAL       ECONOMY

     But where will demand be large? Some of the demand for manu-
  factured goods will come from the agricultural sector; if that were
  the whole story, the distribution of manufacturing production would
  essentially form a lattice whose form was dictated by the distribution
  of agricultural land, as in the classic schemes of Christaller (1933)
  and Losch (1940). But it is not the whole story: some of the demand
  for manufactures will come not from the agricultural sector but from
  the manufacturing sector itself.
     This creates an obvious possibility for what Myrdal (1957) called
  "circular causation" and Arthur (1990) has called "positive feedback":
  manufactures production will tend to concentrate where there is a
  large market, but the market will be large where manufactures pro-
  duction is concentrated.
     The circularity created by this Hirschman (1958)-type "backward
  linkage" may be reinforced by a "forward linkage": other things
  equal, it will be more desirable to live and produce near a concentra-
  tion of manufacturing production because it will then be less expen-
  sive to buy the goods this central place provides.
     This is not an original story; indeed, a story along roughly these
  lines has long been familiar to economic geographers, who emphasize
  the role of circular processes in the emergence of the U.S. manufac-
  turing belt in the second half of the nineteenth century (see in partic-
  ular Pred [1966] and Meyer [1983]). The main goal of this paper
  is to show that this story can be embodied in a simple yet rigorous
  model. However, before we move on to this model, it may be worth
  pursuing the intuitive story a little further to ask two questions: How
  far will the tendency toward geographical concentration proceed, and
  where will manufacturing production actually end up?
     The answer to the first question is that it depends on the underlying
  parameters of the economy. The circularity that can generate manu-
  facturing concentration will not matter too much if manufacturing
  employs only a small fraction of the population and hence generates
  only a small fraction of demand, or if a combination of weak econo-
  mies of scale and high transportation costs induces suppliers of goods
  and services to the agricultural sector to locate very close to their
  markets. These criteria would have been satisfied in a prerailroad,
  preindustrial society, such as that of early nineteenth-century
  America. In such a society the bulk of the population would have
  been engaged in agriculture, the small manufacturing and commer-
  cial sector would not have been marked by very substantial economies
  of scale, and the costs of transportation would have ensured that most
  of the needs that could not be satisfied by rural production would be
   satisfied by small towns serving local market areas.




                This content downloaded from 141.218.001.105 on August 04, 2016 15:09:48 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
  INCREASING      RETURNS                                                                   487
     But now let the society spend a higher fraction of income on nonag-
  ricultural goods and services; let the factory system and eventually
  mass production emerge, and with them economies of large-scale
  production; and let canals, railroads, and finally automobiles lower
  transportation costs. Then the tie of production to the distribution
  of land will be broken. A region with a relatively large nonrural popu-
  lation will be an attractive place to produce both because of the large
  local market and because of the availability of the goods and services
  produced there. This will attract still more population, at the expense
  of regions with smaller initial production, and the process will feed
  on itself until the whole of the nonrural population is concentrated
  in a few regions.
     This not entirely imaginary history suggests that small changes in
  the parameters of the economy may have large effects on its qualita-
  tive behavior. That is, when some index that takes into account trans-
  portation costs, economies of scale, and the share of nonagricultural
  goods in expenditure crosses a critical threshold, population will start
  to concentrate and regions to diverge; once started, this process will
  feed on itself.
     The story also suggests that the details of the geography that
  emerges-which regions end up with the population-depend            sensi-
  tively on initial conditions. If one region has slightly more population
  than another when, say, transportation costs fall below some critical
  level, that region ends up gaining population at the other's expense;
  had the distribution of population at that critical moment been only
  slightly different, the roles of the regions might have been reversed.
     This is about as far as an informal story can take us. The next step
  is to develop as simple a formal model as possible to see whether the
  story just told can be given a more rigorous formulation.



  II.    A Two-Region Model
  We consider a model of two regions. In this model there are assumed
  to be two kinds of production: agriculture, which is a constant-returns
  sector tied to the land, and manufactures, an increasing-returns sec-
  tor that can be located in either region.
     The model, like many of the models in both the new trade and the
  new growth literature, is a variant on the monopolistic competition
  framework initially proposed by Dixit and Stiglitz (1977). This frame-
  work, while admittedly special, is remarkably powerful in its ability
  to yield simple intuition-building treatments of seemingly intractable
  issues.




                This content downloaded from 141.218.001.105 on August 04, 2016 15:09:48 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
  488                                               JOURNAL        OF POLITICAL     ECONOMY

    All individuals in this economy, then, are assumed to share a utility
  function of the form
                                        U = CMCA S                                           (1)
  where CA is consumption of the agricultural good and CMis consump-
  tion of a manufactures aggregate. Given equation (1), of course, man-
  ufactures will always receive a share t of expenditure; this share is
  one of the key parameters that will determine whether regions con-
  verge or diverge.
     The manufactures aggregate CMis defined by
                                            N             al
                                                          or/(or


                                CM -      cE,        1)/u]                                   (2)

  where N is the large number of potential products and a > 1 is the
  elasticity of substitution among the products. The elasticity a is
  the second parameter determining the character of equilibrium in
  the model.
     There are two regions in the economy and two factors of produc-
  tion in each region. Following the simplification suggested in Krug-
  man (1981), each factor is assumed specific to one sector. Peasants
  produce agricultural goods; without loss of generality we suppose
  that the unit labor requirement is one. The peasant population is
  assumed completely immobile between regions, with a given peasant
  supply (1 - ,u)/2 in each region. Workers may move between the
  regions; we let L1 and L2 be the worker supply in regions 1 and 2,
  respectively, and require only that the total add up to the overall
  number of workers ':1

                                        LI + L2 = 1X-                                        (3)
     The production of an individual manufactured good i involves a
  fixed cost and a constant marginal cost, giving rise to economies of
  scale:
                                       LMi = (X + 13X,                                       (4)
  where LM,is the labor used in producing i and xl is the good's output.
    We turn next to the structure of transportation costs between the
  two regions. Two strong assumptions will be made for tractability.
  First, transportationof agricultural output will be assumed to be costless.2

     1 This choice of units ensures that the wage rate of workers equals that of peasants
  in long-run equilibrium.
    2 The reason for this assumption is that since agricultural products are assumed to
  be homogeneous, each region is either exporting or importing them, never both. But




                This content downloaded from 141.218.001.105 on August 04, 2016 15:09:48 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
  INCREASING      RETURNS                                                                  489
  The effect of this assumption is to ensure that the price of agricultural
  output and, hence, the earnings of each peasant are the same in both
  regions. We shall use this common agricultural price/wage rate as
  numeraire. Second, transportation costs for manufactured goods will
  be assumed to take Samuelson's "iceberg" form, in which transport
  costs are incurred in the good transported. Specifically, of each unit
  of manufactures shipped from one region to the other, only a fraction
  T < 1 arrives. This fraction T, which is an inverse index of transporta-
  tion costs, is the final parameter determining whether regions con-
  verge or diverge.
     We can now turn to the behavior of firms. Suppose that there
  are a large number of manufacturing firms, each producing a single
  product. Then given the definition of the manufacturing aggregate
  (2) and the assumption of iceberg transport costs, the elasticity of
  demand facing any individual firm is a (see Krugman 1980). The
  profit-maximizing pricing behavior of a representative firm in region
  1 is therefore to set a price equal to

                                     P1   =   (_         P,                                  (5)
  where w, is the wage rate of workers in region 1; a similar equation
  applies in region 2. Comparing the prices of representative products,
  we have
                                              Pi   WI                                        (6)
                                              P2   W2

    If there is free entry of firms into manufacturing, profits must be
  driven to zero. Thus it must be true that

                                    (Pi - 1w1)xI = awl,                                      (7)
  which implies
                                                    O(a-1))(8                                (8)
                                    XI = X2 =       0(

  That is, output per firm is the same in each region, irrespective of
  wage rates, relative demand, and so forth. This has the useful implica-
  tion that the number of manufactured goods produced in each region


  if agricultural goods are costly to transport, this would introduce a "cliff" at the point
  at which the two regions have equal numbers of workers and thus at which neither
  had to import food. This is evidently an artifact of the two-region case: if peasants
  were spread uniformly across a featureless plain, there would be no discontinuity.




                This content downloaded from 141.218.001.105 on August 04, 2016 15:09:48 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
 490                                                 JOURNAL        OF POLITICAL    ECONOMY

  is proportional to the number of workers, so that
                                               n1 _ L1                                       (9)
                                               n2   L2(

     It should be noted that in zero-profit equilibrium, a/(a - 1) is the
  ratio of the marginal product of labor to its average product, that is,
  the degree of economies of scale. Thus although a is a parameter of
  tastes rather than technology, it can be interpreted as an inverse index
  of equilibrium economies of scale.
     I have now laid out the basic structure of the model. The next step
  is to turn to the determination of equilibrium.


  III.    Short-Run and Long-Run Equilibrium
  This model lacks any explicit dynamics. However, it is useful to have
  a concept of short-run equilibrium before we turn to full equilibrium.
  Short-run equilibrium will be defined in a Marshallian way, as an
  equilibrium in which the allocation of workers between regions may
  be taken as given. We then suppose that workers move toward the
  region that offers them higher real wages, leading to either conver-
  gence between regions as they move toward equality of worker/peas-
  ant ratios or divergence as the workers all congregate in one region.
     To analyze short-run equilibrium, we begin by looking at the de-
  mand within each region for products of the two regions. Let cll be
  the consumption in region 1 of a representative region 1 product,
  and c12be the consumption in region 1 of a representative region 2
  product. The price of a local product is simply its free on board
  price Pl; the price of a product from the other region, however, is
  its transport cost-inclusive price P2/T. Thus the relative demand for
  representative products is

                                CGl        (Pr r)    =    (Wl   )   *                      (10)

                                C12            P2           W2

     Define zI1 as the ratio of region 1 expenditureon local manufactures
  to that on manufactures from the other region. Two points should
  be noted about z. First, a 1 percent rise in the relative price of region
  1 goods, while reducing the relative quantity sold by a percent, will
  reduce the value by only a - 1 percent because of the valuation
  effect. Second, the more goods produced in region 1, the higher their
  share of expenditure for any given relative price. Thus


                             kn2)     (   P2    Ci12J      L2'(W21                         (11)



                This content downloaded from 141.218.001.105 on August 04, 2016 15:09:48 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
  INCREASING      RETURNS                                                                   491
  Similarly, the ratio of region 2 spending on region 1 products to
  spending on local products is

                                  Z12 =
                                          (E)(
                                                                                           (12)
                                                         I)

    The total income of region 1 workers is equal to the total spending
  on these products in both regions. (Transportation costs are included
  because they are assumed to be incurred in the goods themselves.)
  Let Y, and Y2 be the regional incomes (including the wages of peas-
  ants). Then the income of region 1 workers is


                      w1LI =       E(1           1       +(                                (13)

  and the income of region 2 workers is


                      w2L2 = 4L(          2 11)Y? (l +                2)l                  (14)

  The incomes of the two regions, however, depend on the distribution
  of workers and their wages. Recalling that the wage rate of peasants
  is the numeraire, we have

                                    Y       1            + wLI                              (15)
                                                     2        1

  and

                                    Y=      1-           + w2L2                             (16)

    The set of equations (11)-(16) may be regarded as a system that
  determines w1 and w2 (as well as four other variables) given the distri-
  bution of labor between regions 1 and 2. By inspection, one can see
  that if LI = L2, wI = w2. If labor is then shifted to region 1, however,
  the relative wage rate wI/w2 can move either way. The reason is that
  there are two opposing effects. On one side, there is the "home mar-
  ket effect": other things equal, the wage rate will tend to be higher
  in the larger market (see Krugman 1980). On the other side, there is
  the extent of competition: workers in the region with the smaller
  manufacturing labor force will face less competition for the local
  peasant market than those in the more populous region. In other
  words, there is a trade-off between proximity to the larger market
  and lack of competition for the local market.
    As we move from short-run to long-run equilibrium, however, a
  third consideration enters the picture. Workers are interested not in



                This content downloaded from 141.218.001.105 on August 04, 2016 15:09:48 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
  492                                                  JOURNAL   OF POLITICAL       ECONOMY

 nominal wages but in real wages, and workers in the region with the
 larger population will face a lower price for manufactured goods. Let
 f = LI/pL, the share of the manufacturing labor force in region 1.
 Then the true price index of manufactured goods for consumers
 residing in region 1 is
                               f~ -(l-) ~        ~
                                                a-I1) ~~~-a1
                   PI    = [fwF(        + (1          f)                                   (17)

  that for consumers residing in region 2 is


                   P2=      f( T             ) + (1 -f)w J(a                               (18)


  The real wages of workers in each region are

                                            WI=      w1Pj'                                 (19)

  and
                                            (1)2 =   W2P2    .                             (20)
     From (17) and (18), it is apparent that if wage rates in the two
 regions are equal, a shift of workers from region 2 to region 1 will
 lower the price index in region 1 and raise it in region 2 and, thus,
  raise real wages in region 1 relative to those in region 2. This there-
  fore adds an additional reason for divergence.
     We may now ask the crucial question: How does W1/W2 vary with
 f? We know by symmetry that when f = 1/2,that is, when the two
  regions have equal numbers of workers, they offer equal real wage
  rates. But is this a stable equilibrium? It will be if W1/W2 decreases
  withyf for in that case whenever one region has a larger work force
  than the other, workers will tend to migrate out of that region. In
  this case we shall get regional convergence. On the other hand,
  if W1/W2 increases with f, workers will tend to migrate into the re-
  gion that already has more workers, and we shall get regional diver-
  gence.3 As we have seen, there are two forces working toward


    3This description of dynamics actually oversimplifies in two ways. First, it implicitly
  assumes that W1I/2 is a monotonic function off, or at least that it crosses one only once.
  In principle, this need not be the case, and there could be several stable equilibria in
  which both regions have nonzero manufacturing production. I have not been able to
  rule this out analytically, although it turns out not to be true for the numerical example
  considered below. The analytical discussion in the next section simply bypasses the
  question. Second, a dynamic story should take expectations into account. It is possible
  that workers may migrate into the region that initially has fewer workers because they
  expect other workers to do the same. This kind of self-fulfilling prophecy can occur,
  however, only if adjustment is rapid and discount rates are not too high. See Krugman
  (1991) for an analysis.




                This content downloaded from 141.218.001.105 on August 04, 2016 15:09:48 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
 INCREASING           RETURNS                                                              493

               1I 2
            1.12_
              1.1 _

            1.08_
            1.06=                                                             0.75
            1.04_
            1.02 -


            0.98_
            0.96 -
            0.94 _
            0.92 -                                                           T1=0.5

               *        0.1     0.2   0.3   0.4     0.5    0.6   0.7   0.8    0.9     f

                                                  FIG. 1




  divergence-the home market effect and the price index effect-and
  one working toward convergence, the degree of competition for the
  local peasant market. The question is which forces dominate.
     In principle, it is possible simply to solve our model for real wages
  as a function off. This is, however, difficult to do analytically. In the
  next section an alternative approach is used to characterize the
  model's behavior. For now, however, let us simply note that there are
  only three parameters in this model that cannot be eliminated by
  choice of units: the share of expenditure on manufactured goods, t;
  the elasticity of substitution among products, a; and the fraction of
  a good shipped that arrives, T. The model can be quite easily solved
  numerically for a variety of parameters. Thus it is straightforward to
  show that depending on the parameter values we may have either
  regional convergence or regional divergence.
     Figure 1 makes the point. It shows computed values of W1/W2 as a
  function of f in two different cases. In both cases we assume C = 4
  and t = .3. In one case, however, T = .5 (high transportation costs);
  in the other, T = .75 (low transportation costs). In the high-
  transport-cost case, the relative real wage declines as f rises. Thus
  in this case we would expect to see regional convergence, with the
  geographical distribution of the manufacturing following that of agri-
  culture. In the low-transport-cost case, however, the slope is reversed;
  thus we would expect to see regional divergence.
     It is possible to proceed entirely numerically from this point. If
  we take a somewhat different approach, however, it is possible to
  characterize the properties of the model analytically.



                This content downloaded from 141.218.001.105 on August 04, 2016 15:09:48 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
  494                                                 JOURNAL    OF POLITICAL       ECONOMY

  IV.    Necessary Conditions for Manufacturing
         Concentration
  Instead of asking whether an equilibrium in which workers are dis-
  tributed equally between the regions is stable, this section asks
  whether a situation in which all workers are concentrated in one
  region is an equilibrium. This is not exactly the same question: as
  noted above, it is possible both that regional divergence might not
  lead to complete concentration and that there may exist stable interior
  equilibria even if concentration is also an equilibrium. The questions
  are, however, closely related, and this one is easier to answer.
     Consider a situation in which all workers are concentrated in region
  1 (the choice of region of course is arbitrary). Region 1 will then
  constitute a larger market than region 2. Since a share of total income
  p is spent on manufactures and all this income goes to region 1, we
  have
                                         Y2       1                                        (21)
                                         YL        1?+
    Let n be the total number of manufacturing firms; then each firm
  will have a value of sales equal to


                                              (       I   Y2),                             (22)

  which is just enough to allow each firm to make zero profits.
     Now we ask: Is it possible for an individual firm to commence
  production profitably in region 2? (I shall refer to such a hypothetical
  firm as a "defecting" firm.) If not, then concentration of production
  in region 1 is an equilibrium; if so, it is not.
     In order to produce in region 2, a firm must be able to attract
  workers. To do so, it must compensate them for the fact that all
  manufactures (except its own infinitesimal contribution) must be im-
  ported; thus we must have

                                              W2
                                                                                          ~~~~~~~~(23)

  Given this higher wage, the firm will charge a profit-maximizing price
  that is higher than that of other firms in the same proportion. We
  can use this fact to derive the value of the firm's sales. In region
  1, the defecting firm's value of sales will be the value of sales of a
  representative firm times (W2/WlT)<(U   1). In region 2, its value of sales
  will be that of a representative firm times (w2T1wl<)U( 1-), so the total




                This content downloaded from 141.218.001.105 on August 04, 2016 15:09:48 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
  INCREASING      RETURNS                                                                      495
  value of the defecting firm's sales will be

                    V2 =                W              I ?    (jW2)                   Y2J.     (24)

     Notice that transportation costs work to the firm's disadvantage in
  its sales to region 1 consumers but work to its advantage in sales to
  region 2 consumers (because other firms must pay them but it does
  not).
     From (22), (23), and (24) we can (after some manipulation) derive
  the ratio of the value of sales by this defecting firm to the sales of
  firms in region 1:

                   V2 = I/2TV(u'1)[(1 + VA)TU1 ? (1 -                          VL)T      )].   (25)

     One might think that it is profitable for a firm to defect as long as
  V2/VI >   1, since firms will collect a constant fraction of any sales as a
  markup over marginal costs. This is not quite right, however, because
  fixed costs are also higher in region 2 because of the higher wage
  rate. So we must have V2/V1 > W21WI = Tv. We must therefore define
  a new variable,

                      V =   1/2T1U[(1   +        +)l         (1       -
                                                                           ,(a-)]              (26)
  When v < 1, it is unprofitable for a firm to begin production in region
  2 if all other manufacturing production is concentrated in region 1.
  Thus in this case concentration of manufactures production in one
  region is an equilibrium; if v > 1, it is not.
     Equation (26) at first appears to be a fairly unpromising subject for
  analytical results. However, it yields to careful analysis.
     First note what we want to do with (26). It defines a boundary:a set
  of critical parameter values that mark the division between concentra-
  tion and nonconcentration. So we need to evaluate it only in the
  vicinity of v = 1, asking how each of the three parameters must
  change in order to offset a change in either of the others.
     Let us begin, then, with the most straightforward of the parame-
  ters, [L.We find that

                     -=      va(lnT)        +   l/2TP[TU1         -       T(Ul)]      < 0.     (27)

  That is, the larger the share of income spent on manufactured goods,
  the lower the relative sales of the defecting firm. This takes place for
  two reasons. First, workers demand a larger wage premium in order
  to move to the second region; this "forward linkage" effect is reflected




                This content downloaded from 141.218.001.105 on August 04, 2016 15:09:48 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
  496                                                       JOURNAL         OF POLITICAL     ECONOMY

                  V
                 2-
             1.8
             1.6
             1.4-
             1.2-


             0.8-
             0.6-
             0.4_
             0.2_

                 O0.4        0.5          0.6        0.7           0.8         0.9       1
                                                   FIG. 2


  in the first term. Second, the larger the share of expenditure on
  manufactures, the larger the relative size of the region 1 market and
  hence the stronger the home market effect. This "backward linkage"
  is reflected in the second term in (27).
     Next we turn to transportation costs. From inspection of (26), we
  first note that when T = 1, v = 1; that is, when transport costs are
  zero, location is irrelevant (no surprise!). Second, we note that when
  T is small, v approaches (1 -   ,u)TlT(l).   Unless a is very small or >t
  very large, this must exceed one for sufficiently small T (the economics
  of the alternative case will be apparent shortly). Finally, we evaluate
  dv/lT:
            iv          pv         Tl(
                                   T)"-   -     1)[(1 + R                _ (1 -L)T-(O-
            aT           T                                    2T                                 (28)

  For T close to one, the second term in (28) approaches L(a - 1) >
  0; since the first term is always positive, av/aT > 0 for v near one.
     Taken together, these observations indicate a shape for v as a func-
  tion of T that looks like figure 2 (which represents an actual calculation
  for p. = .3, a = 4): at low levels of T (i.e., high transportation costs),
  v exceeds one and it is profitable to defect. At some critical value of
  T, v falls below one and concentrated manufacturing is an equilib-

  rium, and the relative value of sales then approaches one from below.
     The important point from this picture is that at the critical value
  of T that corresponds to the boundary between concentration and
  nonconcentration, aV/3T is negative. That is, higher transportation
  costs militate against regional divergence.
     We can also now interpret the case in which a(1 - p.) < 1, so that
  v < 1 even at arbitrarily low T. This is a case in which economies of



                This content downloaded from 141.218.001.105 on August 04, 2016 15:09:48 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
  INCREASING         RETURNS                                                                497
  scale are so large (small a) or the share of manufacturing in expendi-
  ture is so high (high pu)that it is unprofitable to start a firm in region
  2 no matter how high transport costs are.
    Finally, we calculate av/aiu:

             d   = ln(T){puv     +   l/2T"1O[(1 + ,u)T'l      -   (1 -   [T_(     )]}


                               ((T)(Dav)                                                   (29)
                 =    lnT)



  Since we have just seen that aV/aT is negative at the relevant point, this
  implies that av/&aris positive. That is, a higher elasticity of substitution
  (which also implies smaller economies of scale in equilibrium) works
  against regional divergence.
    The implications of these results can be seen diagrammatically.
  Holding a constant, we can draw a boundary in pu,T space. This
  boundary marks parameter values at which firms are just indifferent
  between staying in a region 1 concentration and defecting. An econ-
  omy that lies inside this boundary will not develop concentrations of
  industry in one or the other region; an economy that lies outside the
  boundary will. The slope of the boundary is

                                      aT       _   aiv/ap <


  If we instead hold [i constant and consider changing a, we find

                                      aT       _   av/aikl
                                     3o    -       aV/aT>0

 Thus an increase in a will shift the boundary in pu,T space outward.
    Figure 3 shows calculated boundaries in pu,T space for two values
 of a, 4 and 10. The figure tells a simple story that is precisely the
 intuitive story given in Section I. In an economy characterized by
 high transportation costs, a small share of footloose manufacturing,
 or weak economies of scale, the distribution of manufacturing pro-
 duction will be determined by the distribution of the "primary stra-
 tum" of peasants. With lower transportation costs, a higher manufac-
 turing share, or stronger economies of scale, circular causation sets
 in, and manufacturing will concentrate in whichever region gets a
 head start.
    What is particularly nice about this result is that it requires no
 appeal to elusive concepts such as pure technological externalities:
 the external economies are pecuniary, arising from the desirability of
 selling to and buying from a region in which other producers are



                This content downloaded from 141.218.001.105 on August 04, 2016 15:09:48 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
  498                                                 JOURNAL    OF POLITICAL       ECONOMY



                17-                               0

            0.8_


            0.6-


            0.4-


            0.2_



                      0.1      0.2     0.3     0.4      0.5     0.6     0.7
                                                                                   /
                                              FIG. 3


  concentrated. It also involves no arbitrary assumptions about the geo-
  graphical extent of external economies: distance enters naturally via
  transportation costs, and in no other way. The behavior of the model
  depends on "observable" features of the tastes of individuals and the
  technology of firms; the interesting dynamics arise from interaction
  effects.
     Obviously this is a vastly oversimplified model even of the core-
  periphery issue, and it says nothing about the localization of particu-
  lar industries. The model does illustrate, however, how tools drawn
  from industrial organization theory can help to formalize and
  sharpen the insights of a much-neglected field. Thus I hope that this
  paper will be a stimulus to a revival of research into regional econom-
  ics and economic geography.

  References
  Arthur, W. Brian. "Competing Technologies, Increasing Returns, and Lock-
    in by Historical Events." Econ. J. 99 (March 1989): 116-31.
         . "Positive Feedbacks in the Economy." ScientificAmerican 262 (Febru-
    ary 1990): 92-99.
  Christaller, Walter. Central Places in Southern Germany.Jena: Fischer, 1933.
    English translation by Carlisle W. Baskin. London: Prentice-Hall, 1966.
  David, Paul. "The Marshallian Dynamics of Industrialization: Chicago,
     1850-1890." J. Urban Econ. (in press).
  Dixit, Avinash K., and Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Monopolistic Competition and
    Optimum Product Diversity." A.E.R. 67 (June 1977): 297-308.
  Hirschman, Albert 0. The Strategy of Economic Development. New Haven,
    Conn.: Yale Univ. Press, 1958.
  Hoover, Edgar M. The Location of EconomicActivity. New York: McGraw-Hill,
     1948.



                This content downloaded from 141.218.001.105 on August 04, 2016 15:09:48 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
  INCREASING      RETURNS                                                                   499
  Krugman, Paul. "Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern
    of Trade." A.E.R. 70 (December 1980): 950-59.
         . "Intraindustry Specialization and the Gains from Trade." J.P.E 89
    (October 1981): 959-73.
         . "History versus Expectations." QJ.E. 106 (May 1991).
  Losch, August. The Economicsof Location.Jena: Fischer, 1940. English transla-
    tion. New Haven, Conn.: Yale Univ. Press, 1954.
  Murphy, Kevin M.; Shleifer, Andrei; and Vishny, Robert W. "Income Distri-
    bution, Market Size, and Industrialization." QJ.E. 104 (August 1989):
    537-64. (a)
         . "Industrialization and the Big Push." J.P.E 97 (October 1989):
    1003-26. (b)
  Meyer, David R. "Emergence of the American Manufacturing Belt: An Inter-
    pretation." J. Hist. Geography9, no. 2 (1983): 145-74.
  Myrdal, Gunnar. EconomicTheoryand Under-developedRegions. London: Duck-
    worth, 1957.
  Pred, Allan R. The Spatial Dynamics of U.S. Urban-IndustrialGrowth, 1800-
    1914: Interpretiveand TheoreticalEssays. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1966.
  von Thunen, Johann Heinrich. The Isolated State. Hamburg: Perthes, 1826.
    English translation. Oxford: Pergamon, 1966.




                This content downloaded from 141.218.001.105 on August 04, 2016 15:09:48 PM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).
