[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: journal/T09-arthur-1990-silicon-valley-locational-clusters-when-do-increasing-returns-imply-monopoly-10.1016-0165-4896-90-90064-E.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Title:           PII: 0165-4896(90)90064-E
Creator:         Acrobat 3.0 Capture Plug-in
Producer:        Acrobat 3.0 Import Plug-in
CreationDate:    Fri Sep 21 23:23:54 2001 WIB
ModDate:         Sun Dec 16 12:34:23 2001 WIB
Custom Metadata: no
Metadata Stream: no
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            none
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           17
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       468 x 684 pts
Page rot:        0
File size:       1196881 bytes
Optimized:       yes
PDF version:     1.2
[Extracted Text]
Mathematical Social Sciences 19 (1990) 235-25 I                                                      235
North-Holland




       ‘SILICON VALLEY’ LOCATIONAL CLUSTERS:                                      WHEN        DO
       INCREASING  RETURNS IMPLY MONOPOLY?

       W. Brian ARTHUR
       Dean and Virginia Morrison Professor of Population Studies and Economics, F. R.I., Stanford
       University, Stanford CA 94305-6084 U.S.A., and Santa Fe Institute, 1120 Canyon Rd. Santa Fe,
       NM 875OI. U.S.A.

       Communicated by M. Shubik
       Received 14 January 1988
       Revised 13 November 1989


          It is often argued that the presence of increasing returns implies that one product, or one
       technology, out of several possible must come to dominate a market. This paper examines this
       argument in the context of regional economics. It constructs a model of industry location where
       firms choosing among regions are attracted by agglomeration economies due to the presence of
       other firms in these regions, and where ‘historical accident’ enters because firms are hetero-
       geneous and enter the industry in random order. It asks: When do economies of agglomeration
       lead to a ‘Silicon Valley’ - a single dominant location or region monopolizing the industry?
          The paper shows that: (i) Where there is no upper bound to locational increasing returns due
       to agglomeration, there will indeed be a monopoly outcome: industry will cluster in one dominant
       region, with probability one. (Which region depends both on geographical attractiveness and ac-
       cidental historical order of firm entry.) (ii) Where there is an upper bound to increasing returns
       due to agglomeration, certain sequences of firm entry can produce dominance by one region;
       others can produce regional sharing of the industry exactly as if the agglomeration effects were
       absent.
          Construed more generally in economics, the results show that increasing returns, if bounded,
       do not guarantee monopoly outcomes.

       Key words: Path-dependent dynamics; location theory; stochastic processes; strong laws; in-
       creasing returns; non-convex economics; monopoly; regional disparity; economic geography.



1. Introduction

   It is often argued in economics that the presence of increasing returns - decreasing
costs, or network externalities - implies that one product or one technology out of
several possible must come to dominate a market. This paper examines this argu-
ment in the context of industrial location and regional economics.
   Increasing returns occur in regional economics in the form of agglomeration
economies - net benefits of firms being close to other firms. Where firms entering
an industry benefit from the presence of other firms, a predominant share of the
industry may cluster in a single region, or district, or location - a ‘Silicon Valley’

Ol65-489619OG3.50 @ l990-Elsevier       Science Publishers B.V. (North-Holland)
‘36                         It’.B. Arthur / ‘Silicon Val1e.v’locational clusters


 - not necessarily because of any intrinsic advantage of that particular location, but
 because ‘historical accident’ placed certain firms there initially and this concentra-
 tion of firms in turn attracted a high proportion of subsequent entrants.
    This argument, that a single region may come to monopolize an industry due to
agglomeration economies combined with ‘historical accidents’, is not new. It goes
back to the early decades of this century. Several of the less-known members of the
German School of regional economics, in particular Englander (1926), Ritschl
(1927), and Palander (1935), viewed observed locational patterns not as the solution
to a unique-equilibrium spatial-economic problem, but rather as the result of an
historically-dependent   process; with new industry attracted by existing agglomera-
tions, laid down stratum by stratum upon inherited, previous locational formations,
and often clustering where early firms put down.’ Their viewpoint never quite took
hold, however, because it was never properly articulated. Agglomeration economies
introduced analytical difficulties: when one or a few regions might end up with the
entire industry, which regions might come to dominate, as Isard (1956) noted, was
not determinate. The problem was non-convex and there were multiple equilibria.
How one equilibrium - one regional pattern - came to be ‘selected’ was not at all
clear when there were multiple candidate regional patterns of industry location.
    This paper attempts to resolve the problem of industry location under agglomera-
tion economics by asking two main questions: (i) Under what circumstances do
economies of agglomeration lead to the emergence of a ‘Silicon Valley’ - a single
dominant location or region? (ii) Where agglomeration economies cause there to be
multiple asymptotic ‘solutions’ to the locational problem, how does one solution
come to be ‘selected’? It sets up a model of the dynamics of industrial location that
allows ‘historical accidents’ in the shape of heterogeneous firms entering the in-
dustry in random order, and where regions with higher proportions of the industry
exert agglomeration attraction on subsequent entrants.
    The results show that increasing returns to agglomeration, if unbounded, indeed
cause monopoly by a single region or location, and that ‘historical accident’ is all-
important in selecting which region achieves dominance. However, increasing
returns, if bounded, do not necessarily cause a ‘Silicon Valley’ monopoly outcome:
where there are upper limits to the agglomeration benefits, certain combinations of
‘historical accident’ can produce a single dominant region; others can produce
regional dispersion of the industry exactly as if agglomeration effects were absent.
   ’ By this argument, Santa Clara County in California, the actual Silicon Valley, has a high concentra-
tion of the U.S. electronics industry not necessarily because it is close to Pacific sources of supplies or
has better access to advances in academic engineering research than elsewhere, but rather because certain
key people - the Hewletts, the Varians, the Shockleys of the industry - happened to set up near Stanford
University in the 1940s and 1950s. and the local labor expertise and inter-firm market they helped to
create made subsequent location in Santa Clara County extremely advantageous for the thousand or SO
firms that followed them (see Cohen, 1984). Similar arguments appear in the regional-disparity literature:
Myrdal(1957), Faini (1984); and in the ‘growth pole’ theories of Perroux (1955) and others in the 1950s.
Allen and Sanglier (1981) use simulation techniques to show the importance of agglomeration economies
in determining locational patterns.
                      W.B. Arthur / ‘Silicon Valley’ locational clusrers            237


And, paradoxically,   agglomeration     effects can easily cause regional separation of
the industry.


2. A model

   First, some preliminaries. I will say there are economies of agglomeration (Weber,
1909; Hoover, 1937) if net benefits to being in a location together with other firms
increase with the number of firms in the location. The sources are several: as a loca-
tion gains firms, it also gains useful infrastructure. Its labor markets deepen (David,
1984a). Specialized legal and financial services appear. Spare parts and out-of-stock
items become locally available, reducing inventory costs. And social networks come
into being where information, expertise, and contracts can be easily exchanged.
D&economies of agglomeration - net benefits that decrease with increasing numbers
of other firms - may also occur. The location may become congested; land may
become expensive; or firms that sell locally may find themselves in monopolistic
competition with nearby firms as in Liisch (1941). And of course, besides ag-
glomeration effects, there may be benefits or costs due to geographical differences
- in transportation cost, in the availability of raw materials, in factor prices, in
climate, or in proximity to markets.
   I now set up a model where firms in an industry decide on locating in one of N
possible regions, or sites, or cities. Each firm is well informed on profits or returns
- the net present value of siting in each location - at the time of its choice; each
chooses what, for it, is the maximum return location and then stays there. I assume
that new firms are added slowly and the future is discounted so that initially we can
ignore expectational problems and assume that new firms decide to locate at their
sites of present maximum return.
   The firms in an industry differ in product mix or in manufacturing process -
hence in locational needs. In this simple model I condense all benefits or returns,
rj, to firm i for locating in site j, into two components:



where qj is the geographical benefit to firm i for siting in location j (returns in the
absence of other firms); and g(_Yj)is the net agglomeration benefit from having ,Yj
firms already located there at the time of choice. (I will speak of firm tastes,
understanding these to be geographical preferences in the absence of other firms’
settlement. Where the agglomeration function, g, is increasing, we have economies
of agglomeration; where decreasing, diseconomies of agglomeration.)
   Firms enter the industry at different times. Thus, we may think of them as arriv-
ing in sequence to make their choice. I introduce ‘historical accident’ by supposing
that the sequence of firm types that enter is unknown to an observer. Thus, we can
represent each new firm as a random ‘drawing’, of a vector q = (q,, q2, . . . , qN)
which denotes that firm’s locational tastes for each possible site, from a given
238                     W. B. Arthur / ‘Silicon Valley’ locational clusters


distribution F of potential firms over locational tastes. (Thus, F determines the fre-
quency of arrival of different firm types, and in general there is a continuum of
possible firm types.) I assume that the vector of tastes, 4, has finite support. Note
that since we can add a positive constant to all q’s without changing location deci-
sions, we can treat q as always positive. Sites that are frequently preferred (in the
absence of agglomeration economies) I will call attractive and I include in the
analysis only sites that would be chosen with positive probability.
   This model has been kept deliberately simple so as not to complicate the subse-
quent analysis. It could be modified to specify how new firms are generated (see Ar-
thur, 1988) and how other industries might affect locational returns. A later section
discusses several extensions.
   Given the above assumptions, we can compute the probability that an entering
firm chooses location j. Suppose there are yl,y2 , . . . ,yN firms already in locations 1
through N, respectively. Then the probability that the next firm ‘drawn’ prefers J’
over all other sites is:

             Pj = Prob{[qj+g(Yj)l > [4i+g(Y,)l all i #:i)-                                (2)
We can calculate this probability       as the (Lebesgue-Stieltjes)           integral:




where the region of integration Vi= (-~,zi+g(yj)               -g(y;)]  for i#i and ~j=
(-00, 00). I will call p = (pI,p2, . . . , pN) the probability vector of locational choice.
Notice that through the agglomeration function g these probabilities p of an addi-
tion to locations 1 through N are a function of the current configuration of the in-
dustry, as we would expect.
   The problem is now to derive and examine the locational pattern - the proportion
of the industry in regions 1 through N - under different assumptions about
geographical benefits and increasing returns due to agglomeration economies.



3. Dynamics of the locational process

   We proceed by tracing the locational pattern of the industry as it forms, and as
firms of different types enter it. We would expect this pattern to fluctuate somewhat
because of the randomness in entry of firm type; and we would expect its movement
to depend upon its present state, because locational choices depend on the current
placement of firms.
   Starting from a given number of firms in each location (which, for convenience,
we set at zero), the industry forms by the addition of one firm at a time, distributed
to one and only one location. We can describe the spatial configuration of the in-
dustry at ‘time’ n, after n firms in total have located, by the vector of firms in the
N locations Y, = ( yi (n), . . . , y&r)). An equivalent but more convenient description
                          W.B. Arthur / ‘Silicon Valley’ locational clusters             239


is the vector of locations’ shares or proportions of the industry, X,=(X,(~), . . . .
xN(n)), where X, = Y,,/n. The vector of probabilities of locational choice, p, is a
function of Y or, equivalently, a (continuous) function of the locational shares of
the industry, X, and of n.
   Now, the industry forms by the addition of one firm at a time, so that the vector
of firm numbers in the potential locations evolves as:

             Yn+l   =   r,+Nn;&h               Y(0) = 0,                                 (4)
where b is the jth unit vector with probability pj(“; X,).
   Then, dividing (4) by n + 1, the vector of proportions of the industry in sites 1
through N, or locational shares, evolves as:

             X n+l =xn+        --&   [b(n;X,)-X,1;            x, = 0.                    (5)

We can rewrite (5) in the form:

             Xn+l   =xn+                                                       x, = 0,   (6)

where P is defined as the random vector:

             An;X,,)     = b(n;X,)-p(n;X,,).
Equation (6) is the description of the dynamics of loational shares that we want.
Mathematically it has the form of a stochastic approximation.
   Notice that the conditional expectation of p with respect to the current state X,
is zero, hence we can derive the expected motion of the locational shares as:


             JWG., 1-‘M-x,           =   & [P(n;&)-X,I.
We see that, if the probabilitypj(X,J     of an addition to locationj is greater than the
current proportion of the industry Xi(n) in location j, this location’s share should
increase - at least on an expected basis. Conversely, if the probability is less than
the current proportion, it should decrease.
    Equation (6) therefore tells us that locational shares are driven by an expected mo-
tion effect (the second term on the right) that derives from locations’ relative attrac-
tiveness and current agglomeration pull, together with a perturbation effect (the
third term) that derives from randomness in entry. Both expected motions and fluc-
tuations have less effect on shares as the industry grows. Both die away at the rate
 l/n; hence we might expect locational shares to settle down as the industry becomes
large.
    We can get some idea of how locational shares might settle down, for a given loca-
tional probability function p, if we plot expected motions on the unit simplex of
locations’ shares (as in Fig. 1).
 210                       W. B. Arthur   / ‘Silicon   Valley’   locarional   clusters




                 Fig. 1. Expected motions for a given locational probability function.


   Depending upon the function p - and ultimately on the distribution of firm tastes
and the agglomeration function - there may be several points x (several locational
patterns) at which expected motion is zero. These are the fixed points of p, where
p(x) =x. Some of these are attractor points, some are repellor points. We might con-
jecture that, if choices in a given problem are ‘driven’ by a locational probability-of-
choice function p, the locational pattern will converge to a fixed point of p on the
simplex of locational shares, and to one that is an attractor. Furthermore, if there
are multiple attractors, they might all be candidates for the limiting locational pat-
tern, with the locational distribution of the industry falling into the orbit of one of
these by ‘historical accidents’ of sequence of entry.
   A recent set of theorems for path-dependent processes like (6), due to Arthur, Er-
moliev and Kaniovski (1983, 1986, 1987a. 1987b) (referred to here as AEK and ap-
plicable to a broad variety of nonconvex problems in economics and physics)
confirms these conjectures. Under certain technical conditions:2 (i) X,, converges
with probability one to a fixed point where p(x) =x; (ii) X,, can converge to ‘attrac-
tor’ or stable fixed points (points on the simplex that expected motions are toward);

  ’ AEK require that the set of fixed points of p have a finite number of connected components. Recent
work (Arthur, Ermoliev and Kaniovski, 1987b) allows non-unit increments and discontinuities in p. For
a non-technical introduction with applications in various fields see Arthur, Ermoliev and Kaniovski
(1987a). The N=2 case was analyzed by Hill, Lane and Sudderth (1980).
                       W.B. Arthur / ‘Silicon Valley’ locafional clusrers            241


and (iii) X,, cannot converge with positive probability to ‘repellor’ or unstable fixed
points (points on the simplex that expected motions lead away from). Where the
function p varies with time n as in our locational case, this generalized strong-law
theorem still goes through, provided that the dynamics ‘settle down’ to stationarity
- that is, provided that the set of ‘driving’ probabilities {p,} tends to a limit func-
tion p.
   Notice that the standard strong law of large numbers makes statements about
limiting shares when increments are added independently of present state of the pro-
cess. AEK is thus a generalization of the strong law of large numbers for the case
of path-dependent increments.


4. Locational   patterns in several cases

   I have described the spatial formation of the industry as a process where unit in-
crements (firms) are added to one of N categories (candidate locations) with a pro-
bability vector p (of an addition to category 1 through N) that in general is a
function of the current proportions X, in the N categories: p=p(x;n).         We now
seek limiting vectors of locational shares, and we start with a trivial but useful
benchmark case.
   Suppose agglomeration economies are absent, so that g is zero and only
geographical considerations q count. We see from (3) that the probabilities of choice
p, are constant and are therefore independent of locational shares at all times. Thus,
increments are added independently of current proportions, and we can invoke the
standard strong law of large numbers to show that the locational shares X,, con-
verge to p. We then have

Theorem 1. Where there are no economies or diseconomies of agglomeration (that
is, g = 0), then, with probability one, locational shares tend to fixed, predictablepro-
portions in the limit as the industry becomes large.

   In this ‘pure attractiveness’ case, locational dispersion of the industry takes place
to the degree the industry is heterogeneous in taste. If all firms are alike, each will
choose the same maximal location and the industry will cluster. Thus, dense concen-
trations of the film industry near Los Angeles may not necessarily be evidence of
the presence of agglomeration economies. They may simply reflect homogeneity of
early needs - for cheap real estate, dry weather, and good outdoor lighting. Ag-
glomeration economies are not a necessary condition for spatial clustering.

4. I. Unbounded agglomeration economies

   In our more general case where agglomeration economies are present, increments
to locations are not independent - the probability of adding firms depends upon
past additions - so that the standard strong law is not usable. We now examine this
242                   W.B. Arthur / ‘Silicon Valley’ locational clusters


case assuming first that additions of firms always confer net benefits on a location,
without upper limit. We might expect that if one location gets sufficiently ahead in
industry share by ‘historical accident’, it will build up an unassailable advantage and
eventuahy monopolize the industry. This indeed happens.

Theorem 2. Where there are unbounded economies of agglomeration such that the
agglomeration function increases at least at the rate ag/ay> ey“, where p> - 1,
then, with probability one, in the limit as the industry becomes large, one location
takes ail but a finite set of firms. Locational shares tend to zero in all but one
location.

Proof. The argument consists in showing that if n is large enough, for points in the
simplex of locational shares the location of highest share must be chosen with pro-
bability one. Thereafter that location is repeatedly chosen; the process is locked-in
to it and its share of the industry goes to 100%.
    Consider the set B = (XE SN: two or more elements of x are maximal} (see
Fig. 2); and B,, its z-neighborhood.      Points in SN\ B, then represent locational
shares with a unique maximal element, with index J say (of the nearest vertex). Par-
tition SN \ I?, into separate sets CJ designated by the nearest vertex J. Now con-
sider a given point z in CJ. The fact that g is increasing and unbounded guarantees
that there exists a finite time n(z) such that returns (qJ+g(n(z)).zJ)>(qr+g(n(z)+zr),

                                             I




        2                                                                       3
            Fig. 2. Expected motions under unbounded agglomeration economies.
                                W. B. Arthur    / ‘Silicon   Valley    locational    clusters                           243


all I#J. Furthermore, it is easy to show that n(z) has an upper bound n’ in C’.
Therefore, if the process X,, is in CJ at a time n greater than nJ, location J will
have maximal returns for all firm types; it will then be chosen with probability one;
it will continue to be chosen with probability one; the process will never exit CJ
and it will converge to 100% share for location J.
   Alternatively, the process might not enter a set C’; it could stay within B,
forever. Consider ‘balanced’ points 0, defined to be points in the simplex where
locations outside the subset K have zero proportion and those inside K have equal
proportions. No ‘unbalanced points’ in B, can be sustained: beyond some finite
time locations with least share will be shut out as before. Furthermore, the process
cannot cycle: unbalanced points cannot be recovered once they are shut out. X,,
can then stay within B, indefinitely only by converging to a ‘balanced point’ 13,.
However, direct calculation shows that, under the condition stated for g in the
theorem, balanced points 0, are unstable. That is to say, we can show that as long
as ag/ay> EJJ~,with p > - 1, then any given BKsatisfies the instability criterion that
there exists within K a symmetric matrix C, and parameters I and v>O, such
that (C,~(~),Z-~~)~~(C(Z-~~),Z-~~)*~“+~,,             where C, &<a,       for z in a
neighborhood of 0,. By Theorem 3 of Arthur, Ermoliev and Kaniovski (1989), the
instability of 0, ensures that Prob(X, -+ 0,) = 0. The process cannot converge to
OK. It must exit B, in finite time and must therefore converge to some vertex J. The
theorem follows.3 Notice that the limiting probability function p becomes a step
function (with element pJ= 1 for points with nearest vertex J and with each vertex
an attracting fixed point).     0

   In this unbounded-agglomeration    case the locational process eventually ‘locks in’
to a ‘Silicon Valley’ outcome - a monopoly of one location. Which location this is,
of course, depends on the order of entry of firm types and very much on early
locators’ relative preferences for locations. The process is path-dependent (more
precisely, non-ergodic) in that a slightly different order-of-choice history early on
could sway the outcome to a different location becoming predominant. An attrac-
tive location will likely be favored by many firms early in the choice order, and
therefore it has a larger probability of predominating. Attractiveness, interacting
with historical accidents of choice-order, determines the outcome.
   It may seem obvious that monopoly must result in this unbounded agglomeration
case. Yet it is easy to construct entry-sequences that lead to locations sharing the
industry indefinitely; and to show that there is an infinity of such sequences. The
power of this theorem lies in its showing that such nonmonopoly outcomes have
measure zero in the sample space of all possible outcomes.



  3 In reality,   of course,   industries   do not grow forever.      It is best to construe    this theorem   as a law-of-
large-numbers     result in the usual sense that the larger the eventual            size of the industry,   the more likely
locational   shares will lie in the neighborhood    of a vertex.
244                    W.B. Arthur / ‘Silicon Valley’ locational clusters


Remark 1. Where the density function f of geographical         preferences has infinite
‘tails’ in all directions instead of bounded support, it is easy to check that the ver-
tices remain the only stable attractors, and the above theorem again goes through:
a single location again monopolizes.

4.2. Bounded agglomeration economies
    In our next case, where the increasing returns - the agglomeration economies -
 are bounded, monopoly no longer occurs with probability one. In this case, loca-
 tions could, with positive probability, share the industry exactly as if agglomeration
 economies were absent.
    To see why this should be so, suppose agglomeration economies g are increasing
 but bounded above by the constant h: thus, adding firms enhances a location’s ad-
 vantages, but not without limit. Suppose two regions only. Now it may happen that
 if enough firms that prefer region A occur early in the queue of entries, A will move
 sufficiently ahead to dominate B for all subsequent choosers. As before, one loca-
tion will take all. Suppose, however, that firms preferring A and firms preferring
B arrive more or less evenly in the sequence. Then regions A and B will be bid up-
 ward in tandem; both regions will reach the agglomeration upper bound and neither
will be sufficiently ahead to shut out the other (see Fig. 3). But now the agglomera-
tion economies realized will be equal; they will cease to matter in locational choice
and so eventually both regions will share the industry, with shares that will equal
the proportion of firm types that prefer A and B in the absence of agglomeration
economies. Whether monopoly or locational sharing takes place depends, of course,
on ‘historical accident’ of the entry sequence.
    Our N location case is more complicated. We must first determine the ‘candidate’
sets of locations that if bid upward together could shut the other locations out and
thus together dominate the industry.
    Consider the (random) vector of returns n = q+g(y),         for a given vector y of
firms. Important in what follows is the support of these returns, which we will
designate QY. (The support Qy indicates the region in N-dimensional preference (or
returns) space over which firm types are spread.) As settlement takes place and ag-
glomeration economies accrue to locations that are chosen, the returns support Q,,
will shift. If it enters a region where some subset of locations always have maximum
returns, all firms will choose locations in this subset, other locations will never be
chosen, and the process will be then locked-in to this subset of locations.
    Now, let K be a set of locations, and let MK be the cone of vectors in 8ZN with
maximal element in the set K. Let QK be the support of the returns vector q + yK,
where the vector yK has O-elements for locations not in K and h-elements for loca-
tions in K. (This is where returns would eventually lie if locations in set K only were
to receive firms.) We will say that K is a potential lock-in set if (i) QKCMK and (ii)
QKCMK* for any KICK. We will say that K is a potentially dominant set if there
also exists some finite sequence of arrivals that causes Q,, to belong to QEKCMK,
where Qf is any given &-neighborhood of QK.
                       W.B. Arthur / ‘Silicon Valley’ locational clusters             245


        Returns:
        Location 1




                                                                Returns: Location 2
                Fig. 3. Support sets of firms’ returns for a two-location problem.



Theorem 3. Suppose economies of agglomeration g are increasing and bounded
above. Then in the limit as the industry becomes large, one set of locations from
the collection of potentially dominant sets will take 100% of the industry, with pro-
bability one, and each such set K has positive probability of being this monopolizing
set. Furthermore, locations in the monopolizing set share the industry exactly as if
no agglomeration economies had been present and they were the only locations
available at the outset.

Proof. First, the process must converge with probability one to non-zero propor-
tions in some subset J. One firm is added each time, and so some set J of locations
must continue to receive firms ad infinitum. Locations in this set would be bid to
their agglomeration ceiling. Probabilities of additions to locations in J therefore
become independent of current proportions; and by the strong law of large
numbers, the process must converge.
   Now suppose the process converges to non-zero proportions in a non-potentially-
dominant set J. The non-dominance of J implies either that some locations in J
receive firms when their locational probability is zero, or that choices outside J
occur with positive probability. Either way convergence to J is contradicted.
   Finally, consider a set K of locations that is potentially dominant. By definition,
there may occur with positive probability a finite sequence of arrivals that causes
returns Q,, to lie within @in the cone IV&. Once returns lie within this set, loca-
tions other than those in K cannot be preferred and the process locks in to this set
K. Therefore the set K can monopolize the locational process with positive pro-
bability, with location proportions X, converging to the relative proportions of
firms that prefer each location within K. The theorem follows.         Cl
246                    W.B. Arthur / ‘Silicon Valley’ locational clusters


   In this bounded agglomeration case, industry can be shared by several locations.
The reason is not so much that agglomeration is overpowered by heterogeneity, but
rather that certain choice-orders cause several locations to accumulate firms at more
or less the same rate, and therefore agglomeration forces remain balanced enough
as the industry forms for heterogeneity of tastes to spread the firms over these loca-
tions. Thus, the monopolizing tendencies of increasing-return effects may be over-
come by even a small degree of heterogeneity. Historical choice-order once again
matters greatly here - it ‘selects’ the set of dominant locations that will share the
industry. But once this set is decided and ‘locked-in’, the locational process proceeds
as if the agglomeration effects were entirely absent. There are two extreme cases
worth mentioning. First, agglomeration forces may be too weak to cause any
monopolizing of the industry by subsets of locations at all:

Corollary 1. If h~Min,(ci(Q,,M~))           then all locations share the industry, with
probability one, in the proportions        that would have occurred if agglomeration
economies were absent.

   (Here d is the set-distance operator.) In this case potential agglomeration
economies are not great enough to overcome heterogeneity of preferences. Equi-
valently, there are always some firm types that do not switch their ‘natural’ choice
to the populated locations. All locations eventually reach the agglomeration ceiling,
and so agglomeration forces may as well not be present at all. In this special case
history does not matter.
   Second, conditions might exist under which a single location must monopolize the
industry even though agglomeration effects are bounded. To illustrate this, let Qb
be the support of the returns when one firm only has chosen and is in location j.

Corollary  2. If QdCM~j~ for all j, then one location takes all the industry with
probability one.

   In this extreme illustrative case agglomeration economies drive the support
straight into the dominance region of the location that receives the first firm. Prac-
tically speaking, this can happen when preferences are tightly clustered, and when
agglomeration effects at the outset are strong.
   In the results above, it was crucial that firms’ tastes had bounded support. Sup-
pose now they have unbounded support - that is, that the distribution function F
of geographical preferences has infinite tails in all directions.

Theorem 4. Where preferences F have unbounded support, and the agglomeration
function g is bounded above, then all locations share the industry, with probability
 one, in the proportions that would have occurred if agglomeration economies were
absent.
                      W.B. Arthur / ‘Silicon Valley’ locational clusters              247


Proof. In this case no subset can ever become dominant - there is always a positive
probability of a location outside the subset being chosen. Locations are added until
all have been bid up to their agglomeration bound. We may subtract this agglomera-
tion advantage equally from all locations; the dynamics then proceed as if no ag-
glomeration component were present, and all locations share the industry according
to their natural probabilities of being chosen.    Cl


5. Locational   orphaning and spatial separation

   Many industries are not concentrated, Silicon Valley fashion, into a dominant
location. Firms are spread out with some spatial regularity. The usual, Loschian ex-
planation for spreading and separation invokes spatial monopolistic competition:
firms distance themselves from their rivals for local markets. That is, diseconomies
of agglomeration cause firms to separate spatially.
   Strangely enough, economies of agglomeration can also cause separation and
spreading. The reason is that locations with large numbers of firms are preferred
to geographically similar, neighboring locations with few firms. Locations with
large numbers of firms therefore cast an ‘agglomeration shadow’ in which little or
no settlement takes place. This causes separation of the industry.
   To see this in more detail, consider now a two-dimensional landscape with returns
q for any given firm-type varying continuously over the surface - reflecting climate
variation or transportation costs, say. (To preserve finiteness of the number of loca-
tions we can treat potential locations as points on a fine grid. The industry is still
heterogeneous, so that tastes q are distributed as before in the density functionf.)
Tastes are uniformly continuous in the sense that (for all firm types) tastes for two
neighboring sites always differ by less than some E.
   Consider two locations, a and a’, separated by d units (under a suitable metric),
having k and k’ firms respectively. Location a, with more firms, will dominate loca-
tion a’ for all firm types if g(k) + q(a) >g(k’) + q(a’) + E. d, so that site a’ will not
receive any future firms. When attractiveness varies smoothly over the landscape,
then places near a location with a larger number of firms are similar to this location
geographically; and they are not sufficiently more attractive to overcome the ag-
glomeration advantage of their dominant neighbor. These places have become
dynamically orphaned, and we can say that they lie within the agglomeration
shadow of their dominant neighbor.
   As a location receives firms its agglomeration shadow grows; it shuts out further
neighbors and it thereby enlarges the domain of tastes - the ‘gravitational region’
- from which it receives further firms. The result of this, in the realistic case where
agglomeration economies are bounded, is that neighboring locations cannot share
the industry but that sufficiently separated regions can.
   Agglomeration economies have caused separation and dispersion. And once again
which locations gain the industry and which become orphaned is a matter of
historical accident.
248                    W.B. Arthur / ‘Silicon Valley’ locational clusters


6. Remarks    and extensions

   I have shown in a simple model that where agglomeration economies are present,
historical ‘accidents’ of choice-order select a limiting spatial pattern from a possibly
large collection of candidate spatial patterns. The following are brief remarks on
various possible extensions:
   (1) Suppose there were eventual net diseconomies of agglomeration, so that
disamenities of industry ultimately outweighed agglomeration benefits. In this case
g would eventually decrease and be unbounded below. Locations would fill up, part-
ly by historical accident, the attractive ones first, until diminishing returns set in.
Then industry would begin to site in the less attractive locations, and still less attrac-
tive, until all locations showed diminishing returns. I leave it to the reader to con-
firm that the point x=(1/N,...,     l/N) would be the only attractor of the limiting
locational probability function, and therefore that the industry would eventually be
shared equally between all locations, with probability one. Under diseconomies of
agglomeration, historical accident would not count.
   (2) Suppose firms were affected not just by the presence of other firms only in
the same locality but by the entire configuration of firms in all other locations. Total
returns would then become:

             r;=qj+g(y,,yz,...._Y/v).                                                 (8)

with the wider agglomeration function g also possibly location- or firm-type-specific
if necessary. This form would allow cases of more genera1 agglomeration or
deglomeration effects (such as the L6schian monopolistic-competition        case where
neighboring competitors cut into a firm’s demand to a degree that varies with
distance). Analysis in this entire-configuration  framework would be similar to that
above - the AEK strong law for example handles this case directly - but calculation
of the probabilities of locational choice would now be more complicated. I would
expect findings similar to the above.
   (3) Suppose transaction costs to moving were zero, so that firms could move, and
thus ‘recontract’ their locational decisions. Now after each new entrant’s choice
there would be a round of relocations of settled firms that could improve their
returns. Firms would tend to move, from places they settled in that received firms
early on but which have now by ‘chance’ become orphaned or left behind in ag-
glomeration, to places that are currently heavily populated with firms. Again there
would be multiple potential outcomes, with ‘accidents’ of choice-order in moving
as well as in entry selecting an ultimate locational pattern. ‘Historical accident’
would still count.
   (4) Suppose entering firm-types were not independent, but that there was se-
quence ‘linkage’: certain entrants might attract complementary producers; later en-
trants might differentiate their firm-type to fit with earlier entrants; and particular
stages of an industry’s technological development might be associated with the entry
                       W. B. Arthur / ‘Silicon Valley’ locational clusters            249


of a characteristic type of firm. Firm-type arrivals would then be serially correlated;
and path-dependence would extend now to firm-types and to recent arrivals, as well
as to previous locational choices. It would be simple to formulate this case, but
analysis would require more general path-dependent techniques than the ones used
here.
   (5) Suppose present choosers were affected by future firms’ location decisions.
We might then assume that firms form beliefs about the type of stochastic process
they find themselves in, in the shape of conditional probabilities of future states of
the locational process. Expectations would therefore change as the settlement pro-
cess worked itself out. In choosing, firms would create an actual stochastic process,
which would be in rational expectations equilibrium if it were identical to the believ-
ed stochastic process (cf. Lucas, 1972). Preliminary results (see Arthur, 1989) show
that expectations would exacerbate monopoly tendencies. An unattractive location
that was lucky early on could come to dominate as choosing firms increasingly
enhanced their beliefs of that location’s success.


7. Conclusion

    This study investigated conditions under which increasing returns in the form of
agglomeration economies cause monopoly - in this case ‘Silicon Valley’ clustering.
 It showed that if agglomeration economies are unbounded, then a single region or
location selected by ‘historical accident’ indeed monopolizes the industry. But con-
trary to conventional beliefs, agglomeration economies are not sufficient to
guarantee a single-location dominant outcome. If agglomeration economies are
 bounded, even a small amount of heterogeneity can cause regions to share the in-
dustry as if agglomeration economies were absent. Increasing returns do not
necessarily imply monopoly.
    If locational increasing returns are present in the industry location problem, static
equilibrium analysis is not enough. Settlement patterns are path-dependent; we are
forced to follow the locational structure as it forms, and this requires dynamic
analysis. Interestingly, the picture that emerges is more Darwinian than equilibra-
tional in nature, with geographical attractiveness bestowing ‘selectional advantage’;
locations ‘selected’ early on by chance becoming locked-in or ‘fixed’; and some
locations exercising ‘competitive exclusion’ on others by appropriating the available
agglomeration economies.
    The locational analysis of this paper would apply to both the product differentia-
tion and standardization literature, in the case where products like Sony Betamax”
or standards like the ASCI code enjoy network externalities in the sense that their
appeal widens as their market share of user-base grows (see Farrell and Saloner,
1985; Katz and Shapiro, 1985; and Arthur, 1989). We might ask under what cir-
cumstances heterogeneity of taste for differentiated products or for competing stan-
dards might overcome such network-externality            increasing returns, to prevent
250                        W.B. Arthur / ‘Silicon Valley’ locational clusters


monopoly and therefore loss of product diversity, or to prevent emergence of a de
facto, possibly inferior standard. Many of the results would transfer directly.4



Acknowledgments

   I am grateful to the Center for Economic Policy Research at Stanford for finan-
cial support, and to Paul David and Yuri Kaniovski for discussions. An earlier ver-
sion of this paper appeared as C.E.P.R. Publication No. 84, June 1986, Stanford,
under the title ‘Industry Location Patterns and the Importance of History’.


   4 They transfer most directly to the case of competition between differentiated products that are not
priced strategically, or between generic, ‘non-sponsored’, competing standards. Strategic maneuvering
would correspond in our problem to locations offering incentives, in what ‘David (1984b) calls a ‘loca-
tional tournament’. This would add a game-theoretic overlay.



References


P. Allen and M. Sanglier. Urban evolution, self-organization, and decision-making, Environment and
   Planning A, 13 (1981) 167-183.
W.B. Arthur, Urban systems and historical path dependence, in: J.H. Ausubel and R. Herman, eds.,
   Cities and their Vital Systems (National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1988a).
W.B. Arthur, Self-reinforcing mechanisms in economics, in: P.W. Anderson, K.J. Arrow and D. Pines,
   eds.. The Economy as an Evolving Complex System (Addison-Wesley, 1988b).
W.B. Arthur, Competing technologies, increasing returns, and lock-in by historical events, Econom. J.
   99 (1989) 116-131.
W.B. Arthur, Yu.M. Ermoliev and Yu.M. Kaniovski. A generalized urn problem and its applications,
   Kibernetika (trans. in Cybernetics) 19 (1983) 61-71.
W.B. Arthur, Yu.M. Ermoliev and Yu.M. Kaniovski, Strong laws for a class of path-dependent urn pro-
   cesses, in: Proc. Int’l. Conf. on Stochastic Optimization, Kiev, 1984 (Springer Lecture Notes in Con-
   trol and Info. Sciences, No. 81) (1986) 287-300.
W.B. Arthur, Yu.M. Ermoliev and Yu.M. Kaniovski, Path-dependent processes and the emergence of
   macro-structure, Europ. J. Op. Res. 30 (1987a) 294-303.
W.B. Arthur, Yu.M. Ermoliev and Yu.M. Kaniovski, Non-linear urn processes: Asymptotic behavior
   and applications, I.I.A.S.A. Working Paper 87-85, Laxenburg, Austria (1987b).
W.B. Arthur, Yu.M. Ermoliev and Yu.M. Kaniovski. A generalized urn scheme with arbitrary in-
   crements, Santa Fe lnstitute (1989), mimeo.
D.L. Cohen, Locational patterns in the electronics industry: A survey, Stanford (1984). mimeo.
P. David, The Marshallian dynamics of Industrialization: Chicago, 1850-1890, Stanford (1984a),
  mimeo.
P. David, High technology centers and the economics of locational tournaments, Stanford (1984b).
   mimeo.
0. Englinder. Kritisches und Positives zu einer allgemeinen reinen Lehre vom Standort, Zeitschrift fiir
   Volkswirtschaft und Sozialpolitik, Neue Folge, 5 (1926).
R. Faini, Increasing returns, non-traded inputs and regional development, Econom. J. 94 (1984)
  308-323.
                         W. B. Arthur / ‘Silicon Valley locational clusters                      251


J. Farrell and G. Saloner, Standardization, compatibility, and innovation, Rand. J. Econom. 16 (1985)
   70-83.
B. Hill, D. Lane and W. Sudderth, Strong convergence for a class of urn schemes, Ann. Probability 8
   (1980) 214-226.
E.M. Hoover, Location Theory and the Shoe and Leather Industries (Harvard, 1937).
W. Isard, Location and Space-Economy (Wiley, 1956).
M. Katz and C. Shapiro, Network externalities, competition, and compatibility, Am. Econom. Rev. 75
   (1985) 424-440.
A. Losch, The Economics of Location (Yale Univ. Press, 1941).
R. Lucas, Expectations and the neutrality of money, J. Econom. Theory 4 (1972) 103-124.
G. Myrdal, Economic Theory and Underdeveloped Regions (Duckworth, 1957).
T. Palander, Beitrlge zur Standortstheorie (Almqvist and Wicksell, 1935).
F. Perroux, Note sur la Notion de Pole de Croissance, Economic Appliquee 7 (1955) 307-320.
H. Ritschl, Reine und historische Dynamik des Standortes der Erzeugungszweige, Schmollers Jahrbuch
   51 (1927) 813-870.
A. Weber, Theory of the Location of Industries (1909) (Univ. of Chicago Press, 1929).
