[PDF Metadata]
Source PDF: journal/T15-mulligan-partridge-carruthers-2012-central-place-theory-and-its-reemergence-in-regional-science-10.1007-s00168-011-0496-7.pdf
Extracted on: 2026-08-31
Extraction method: pdftotext -layout
Metadata from pdfinfo:

Title:           
Subject:         
Keywords:        
Author:          
Creator:         LaTeX with hyperref package
Producer:        Acrobat Distiller 10.0.0 (Windows)
CreationDate:    Sat Feb 18 12:44:58 2012 WIB
ModDate:         Sat Feb 18 12:46:49 2012 WIB
Custom Metadata: no
Metadata Stream: yes
Tagged:          no
UserProperties:  no
Suspects:        no
Form:            none
JavaScript:      no
Pages:           27
Encrypted:       no
Page size:       439.37 x 666.142 pts
Page rot:        0
File size:       590900 bytes
Optimized:       yes
PDF version:     1.4
[Extracted Text]
Ann Reg Sci (2012) 48:405–431
DOI 10.1007/s00168-011-0496-7

SPECIAL ISSUE PAPER



Central place theory and its reemergence
in regional science

Gordon F. Mulligan · Mark D. Partridge ·
John I. Carruthers




Received: 26 September 2011 / Accepted: 22 December 2011 / Published online: 16 February 2012
© Springer-Verlag 2012



Abstract This paper presents an interdisciplinary review—from the perspectives of
geography, economics, and urban planning—of the literature on central place theory
(CPT) and its important role in regional science. Along the way, CPT is compared
to a more recent description/explanation of the space economy, the new economic
geography (NEG). The main arguments of the paper are that for a host of reasons: (i)
CPT is ripe for reemergence and; (ii) NEG models are best viewed as complements
to, not competitors of, CPT. Some general observations for future research in regional
science follow from these conclusions.

JEL Classification         R12 · R14 · R32




Submitted for publication in the 50th anniversary issue of The Annals of Regional Science, September
2011; this paper was presented at the 2011 meetings of the European Regional Science Association,
in Barcelona, Spain.

G. F. Mulligan
School of Geography and Development, University of Arizona,
Tucson, AZ, USA
e-mail: mulligan@u.arizona.edu

M. D. Partridge
Department of Agricultural, Environmental, and Development Economics,
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA
e-mail: partridge.27@osu.edu

J. I. Carruthers (B)
The George Washington University, Sustainable Urban Planning Program,
Washington, DC, USA
e-mail: jic@gwu.edu


                                                                                           123
406                                                                     G. F. Mulligan et al.


1 Introduction

At any given time, the research of a discipline is both directed and motivated by a
few path-breaking studies that serve as research paradigms. In the case of regional
science, much recent thinking has followed ideas established by Krugman (1991a,b),
who interconnected imperfect competition, externalities, and interregional trade to
form a theoretical framework now labeled the new economic geography (NEG). This
literature has provided an endogenous theory of regional growth—one where the eco-
nomic landscape exhibits geographic specialization. For all of its success, the NEG
has also attracted a fair amount of criticism—the concerns expressed by Martin and
Sunley (1996) are especially well known—but most of this criticism fails to note that,
like many of its rivals, the NEG is highly preoccupied with industrial production. As a
result, the entire topic of consumer demand is essentially neglected, whether interest
is in the access of households to private or to public goods. That deficiency, combined
with the inherent mathematical complexities of the models, means that the economic
landscapes of NEG tend to be highly simplistic. In any event, the equilibrated results
typically lack the complex, multilevel attributes of real-world spatial-economic sys-
tems. As a remedy, this paper suggests that a reexamination of the merits of central
place theory (CPT) is now in order. This corpus of thought, dismissed almost out
of hand by the NEG pioneers (see, for example, comments by Fujita et al. 1999, p.
27), accurately mirrors many features of real-world economic landscapes. The theory
not only integrates, at least conceptually, a wide array of human activities but it also
indicates how human processes are embedded in space or mediated by location. More-
over, CPT has very obvious practical implications for policy and, especially, urban
and regional planning.
    In essence, CPT consists of a set of assumptions and propositions that explain why
hierarchically tiered centers are found at certain preferred locations on the economic
landscape. Retail trade and service activities often tend to cluster, forming urban cen-
ters at one geographic scale and shopping centers at another. At both scales, activity
clusters are ranked according to their relative centrality and functional complexity, and
their frequency distribution is determined by the geographic scope of their drawing
power. In this manner, a key feature of CPT is that basic patterns are consistently
repeated across and within regions. Although not entirely developed, the framework
informs many aspects of regional science—to name just a few: consumer shopping
behavior; business location and clustering; economic base and input–output analysis;
spatial diffusion and human movement; urban growth, rural–urban interdependence,
regional development; and city-size distribution. CPT also holds concrete implications
for urban and regional policy, including public facility location and for planning in
cities and regions.
    This paper provides an overview of CPT theory and its extensions and argues that
the framework is experiencing—and deserves to experience—a reemergence as part
of the core epistemology of regional science. It also very briefly distinguishes CPT
from NEG models, but a complete review of NEG models is well beyond the present
scope. While CPT has a number of key advantages, interest in it waned for about
a 20-year span beginning in the early 1990s, when excitement among researchers
shifted to NEG models. CPT was faulted for lacking microeconomic foundations, not

123
Central place theory and its reemergence in regional science                        407


providing a general equilibrium approach, and in not being fully dynamic. Recently,
however, a renewed interest in CPT has emerged due to its relative accessibility, plus
its realism and value in predicting and describing empirical regularities such as Zipf’s
Law (Saichev et al. 2010), as well as the enduring stability of land use patterns and
urban systems. Perhaps most important of all, CPT is invaluable for helping inform
urban and regional economic development and planning strategies. Overall, this paper
illustrates that CPT should be viewed as complementary to NEG and other urban sys-
tem frameworks for describing how economic activity is organized across geographic
space.
    Toward that end, the discussion is organized as follows. To begin, Sects. 2 and 3
deliver a non-technical overview of traditional CPT and set out its three main con-
cepts: (i) consumer choice; (ii) agglomeration; and (iii) a functional urban hierarchy.
Next, Sect. 4 discusses how a hierarchy actually emerges within CPT and compares
the framework with NEG. Section 5 describes the dynamic features of CPT, such as
they are, and some recent empirical tests of its predictions, and Sect. 6 outlines some
policy applications with an eye toward urban and regional planning. Section 7 presents
conclusions drawn from the discussion and suggests some future research priorities.


2 The traditional theory

Comprehensive summaries of the ideas of Christaller (1933) and Lösch (1941), the
two founders of CPT—along with various refinements and empirical extensions—
include von Böventer (1963), Haggett (1965), Berry (1967), Beckmann (1968), Berry
and Horton (1970), Parr and Denike (1970), Alao et al. (1977), Beavon (1977), Lloyd
and Dicken (1977), King (1984), Mulligan (1984), and Berry and Parr (1988). What
follows is a brief, nontechnical overview of the framework put forward by each.


2.1 The Christaller framework

Christaller (1933) used the concepts of the (population) threshold and the (geographic)
range to provide a top-down explanation for the emergence of a cascading system of
central places. Both of these concepts can be interpreted spatially—where the former
is the inner range and the latter is the outer range—two attributes that serve as geo-
graphic signatures for each good provided in the system. The inner range encompasses
sufficient customers for the typical business to break even (zero profits) and the outer
range encompasses all those customers that travel to purchase the good provided. So
any gap between the inner and outer ranges will generate a surplus or monopoly profit
for the business. A continuum of goods and services is envisaged stretching from
high-order items having large thresholds (specialized shopping goods) and ranges to
low-order items having small thresholds and ranges (standardized convenience goods).
The most central location in the entire system provides all of its goods and services—
thereby satisfying the so-called exhaustive principle. But, moving down through this
functional continuum, other locations on the landscape are sufficiently well located to
provide some, but not all, goods that are provided at the most central location. These
locations, which themselves differentially attract customers from nearby areas, are

                                                                             123
408                                                                     G. F. Mulligan et al.


termed central places. All of the central places are classified into a small number of
orders, reflecting the system’s hierarchical levels, which, in turn, reflect the number
of bundled goods and services that each place provides.
    The key feature of Christaller’s system is the emergence of a regular hierarchy,
wherein a central place on one level provides a bundle of goods and services that is
specific to that level, as well as all bundles that are specific to all lower levels. As a
result, central places on any given level serve a market area containing a number of
lower-level places and rural areas. These (usually hexagonal) market areas are exactly
nested within one another according to a factor K , which Christaller believed to be
fixed in magnitude for a particular system. This spatial-functional arrangement, or
multi-good equilibrium, was believed to be optimally efficient for serving a dispersed
population—an implication that Hsu’s recent (forthcoming) extension of the model
demonstrates. The strengths of Christaller’s scheme are its geometric simplicity and
its insightful behavioral propositions, especially regarding consumer travel behavior.
Figure 1 shows a typical CPT hierarchy, consisting of a spatially cascading set of
market centers surrounded by nested hexagonal market areas.
    The problem with Christaller’s framework is that it is not convincing in terms of
explaining the emergence of a realistic multi-good equilibrium. Basically, he claimed
that spatial competition induces geometric packing as new firms erode the profits of
earlier entrants. Presumably, location adjustments and firm entries and exits continue
until the final spatial equilibrium is reached. In any case, this packing process tends
to maximize the number of central places per unit of area, thereby minimizing overall
customer transportation costs in the entire system.


2.2 The Lösch framework

Lösch, on the other hand, conceived a much more complex bottom-up central place
system whose conceptual foundation is a triangular lattice of discrete farmsteads. He
argued that Christaller’s rigid hierarchy was too restrictive and, instead, proposed using
hexagonal nets of market areas along a near-continuum of sizes, all of which focus
on the system’s most central location—the so-called metropolis. In essence, Lösch
claimed that each of the goods in Christaller’s functional continuum should have its
own signature market area and that, as before, businesses or production points naturally
arise at the center of each different-sized market area. But, in the Lösch framework,
these nets are purposefully rotated in such a way that “city-rich” and “city-poor” sec-
tors emerge, reflecting the varying numbers of production points that turn out to be
coincident on the underlying lattice.
   Lösch’s thinking was that this transformation would create a system that would
be most efficient both for firms (Weber’s principle of agglomeration) and customers
(Zipf’s principle of least effort). So, the most distinctive feature is that each thirty-
degree sector has the same number of central places, but the volume of activities at
these central places varies considerably across the economic landscape. There is added
realism in that smaller places, having low functional complexity, can sometimes serve
large places that enjoy more functional complexity. In short, Lösch allows a more
realistic spatial division of labor on the landscape. Perhaps, Lösch’s most important

123
Central place theory and its reemergence in regional science                                      409




Fig. 1 A typical CPT hierarchy of hexagonal market areas (this figure is a reproduction of Figure 3.9,
on page 57 of Berry and Parr 1988)




contribution was his novel treatment of spatial demand where he used the calculus to
aggregate household demand over space in order to compute the entire market area
demand facing a firm. This allowed him to use the standard tools of microeconom-
ics to specify the firm’s profit-maximizing price and output and to specify the firm’s
optimizing market area. Most observers are skeptical of Lösch’s grand spatial scheme,
realizing he emphasized how the world should be instead of how it really is. Moreover,
he was no clearer than Christaller in explaining how the atomistic behavior of firms in
space can actually generate the complicated multi-good equilibrium found in so many
textbooks.

                                                                                         123
410                                                                     G. F. Mulligan et al.


3 The three key concepts

Part of the great value of CPT rests in its ability to integrate a number of key
concepts in regional science, including (i) consumer choice; (ii) firm agglomera-
tion; and (iii) the functional hierarchy. Firms offering goods and services strive
to occupy locations that are central to their markets but they also cluster in order
to reap mutual advantages. Dispersed consumers strive to minimize the total costs
involved in purchasing these goods as firms arrange themselves in space. With var-
ious adjustments, firms eventually settle on price-location solutions that minimize
the travel costs for consumers, and, at the same time, the clustering of firms leads
to the formation of a hierarchy that efficiently provides all possible goods. In doing
so, tier-specific bundles of goods are formed, each having a different shopping fre-
quency. These three key concepts—choice, agglomeration, and the hierarchy—are
so prevalent throughout spatial sciences that some of this review is now devoted to
each.


3.1 Consumer choice

A wide literature, focusing on a few fundamental concerns, addresses the issue of
how informed agents choose among alternative resource opportunities: What features
of these source opportunities do the agents evaluate? What rules do agents follow
when evaluating alternatives? And, what rules determine the actions of agents after
their evaluations? Matters become more complicated when choices are made in a
spatial setting wherein agents and resource opportunities occupy different locations.
Information, which might be incomplete, tends to exhibit distance-decay as well as
time-decay. Since energy or money expenditures are involved in matching agents and
opportunities at the same location, behavior in space is often very complex to evaluate
(see, Golledge and Stimson 1997).
   Like foraging theory in ecology (Stephens and Krebs 1986), the households of
CPT must decide between nearby places offering a narrow range of goods and ser-
vices—and more distant places offering a larger and deeper array of goods and services
(Golledge et al. 1966). Perhaps, the most novel related research is Rushton (1969),
who constructed space-preference functions to address this fundamental trade-off.
In a sense, this function extends the important notion that behavioral isolines can
be identified for shopping customers (Reilly 1929; Huff 1963). After collecting data
on purchases, curves are drawn in two-dimensional space representing those combi-
nations of travel distance (x-axis) and town population (y-axis) that households are
indifferent to. Curves found higher and to the left (short distances, large towns) are
preferred to curves found lower and to the right (long distances, small towns). Styl-
ized curves, with no inflection points, indicate that consumers must be compensated
with increasingly greater shopping opportunities for incremental travel intervals of
equal length. These indifference curves suggest that distance-population trade-offs
will vary between rich and poor households and, likewise, between rich and poor
regions. After some inflection point (time/cost threshold), households are willing to
travel long distances to take advantage of the rich shopping opportunities found at large,

123
Central place theory and its reemergence in regional science                          411


diverse places. In short, customers do not shop around—a process that involves acquir-
ing data, searching, and evaluating—for cheap, standardized, frequently demanded
goods, but they do shop around for expensive, differentiated, infrequently demanded
goods.
   Simon (1952) was among the first to question total rationality in human actions—
a notion extended by Tversky and Kahneman (1974), among others. In this spirit,
many observers have outlined more realistic models of shopping behavior than those
espousing strictly cost-minimizing behavior. Some of these researchers have advocated
simply extending the set of attributes that households consider when making their eval-
uations. In addition to per unit price, other attributes of the goods and their establish-
ments—including selection, service, safety, and congestion—are known to influence
household behavior. Moreover, transportation infrastructure is hardly uniform and
movement imagery also constrains shopping travel. Other research has focused on
the spatial search process where repeated “shopping trials” for convenience goods are
undertaken, sometimes for many weeks, before a stable pattern of shopping behavior
is chosen. Moreover, there is ample evidence that households may not be aware of
their full set of shopping opportunities.
   In response, Louviere (1974) outlined an information-processing paradigm to take
into account many of these different facets of shopping. In a sense, this is a computa-
tional model for Simon (1952) satisfying behavior—one in which all of the key attri-
butes of goods or situations are evaluated with trade-off functions. This information is
weighted to arrive at a single numerical score that informs the household’s shopping
decision. However, it seems that this approach, like its various counterpart method-
ologies, has been used more to assess how specific attributes of shopping centers,
including those of anchor tenants, affect consumer choice instead of how households
substitute travel distances for changes in these other location-specific attributes (Finn
and Louviere 1996).


3.2 Firm agglomeration

CPT addresses a number of decisions that are simultaneously or sequentially enter-
tained by spatial firms. To begin with, the firm must calculate the optimal price-quantity
combination under conditions of free entry and exit. At the same time, an optimizing
location for the firm must be identified where, via spatial competition, the firm is
maximally separated from its nearest rivals. However, firms typically cluster in space
with firms in other tertiary industries, so they can enjoy the benefits of urbanization
economies (Jacobs 1961). Moreover, in larger places, these same firms cluster with
other firms in the same industry if local demand is sufficient to allow the multipli-
cation of establishments, and localization economies will also emerge. Some notable
empirical studies have addressed the relationships between price and location in this
context (Haining 1983; West and von Hohenbalken 1984; Fik 1988). This idea of
spatial agglomeration, or geographic clustering, is shared by many other sciences: for
example, densely packed, interacting agents are believed to promote creativity and to
spur on the innovation and diffusion of new ideas and skills (Hall 1998; Glaeser and
Maré 2001; Fujita 2009).

                                                                               123
412                                                                       G. F. Mulligan et al.


    In economics, spatial clustering usually reflects external economies of scale, which
are known to arise naturally in a variety of ways (Marshall 1920; Krugman 1991a,b;
Rosenthal and Strange 2006). First, the agglomeration of people and firms leads to
knowledge spill overs where both patents and innovations are themselves clustered,
usually in cities—so success tends to breed further success. Second, agglomeration
tends to promote input sharing where firms learn to outsource to common local sup-
pliers. Concentrated industries have a higher degree of purchased input intensity than
scattered industries, meaning that behavior favors the emergence of other firms in
the same district operating along the same commodity chains. Third, agglomeration
promotes labor pooling, thereby allowing more efficient matches between workers
and employers. Agglomeration also arises because of multipurpose and compara-
tive shopping, primarily in the retail and service industries. Multipurpose (including
multistep) shopping allows households to reduce per unit transportation costs, while
comparative shopping reduces search costs when household information is incom-
plete (Thill 1986; Eaton and Lipsey 1979). Both types of demand externalities are
recognized in the competing destinations model, which also might reflect hierarchical
organization (Fotheringham 1983; Fik and Mulligan 1990). Besides these benefits,
agglomeration also ensures longitudinal stability in economic communities. As aging
industries die, they are replaced by new industries, though external economies of
scale facilitates this transformation. Both North (1955) and Blumenfeld (1955) noted
this important role of geographic clustering in their early discussions of economic
base.
    Although his discussion is constrained to manufacturing, Arthur (1994) suggests
that there are two somewhat different perspectives on the formation of economic land-
scapes. One is deterministic, where firm sites are chosen because of scarce geographic
endowments, local rents, or finite shipment possibilities. In this sense, today’s indus-
trial landscapes might be very different from earlier ones. The other is probabilistic
and, here, path dependency in firm location is crucial—today’s industrial landscapes,
for example, are very much inherited: late-arriving firms are attracted to early-arriving
firms even if the original location decisions were not optimal ones. As a result, con-
temporary industries might still remain competitive even though they do not occupy
the most favorable of all possible locations.
    Classical CPT follows the former school of thought, where the foundations of the
settlement system are those small clusters of tertiary firms, evenly spaced across the
landscape, that offer goods and services to a uniform population of rural households.
Different-sized clusters of firms are then essentially stacked on this functional base one
level at a time. But clusters arise only at those locations that prove to be locally optimal
for (lower-level and same-level) consumer purchases—and they do not materialize by
chance: in fact, any locations that are poor for business are quickly eliminated. So
in smaller central places, agglomeration is largely of the simple urbanization variety
where entirely different convenience functions are offered as simple bundles. But in
larger central places, there is a multiplication of establishments along the same lines, so
the functional agglomeration includes both the localization and urbanization varieties.
Various demand externalities inherent to shopping also promote firm agglomeration
at higher levels of the hierarchy, thereby concentrating industries and distorting the
city-size distribution of the entire central place system.

123
Central place theory and its reemergence in regional science                           413


3.3 The functional hierarchy

Another wide literature in the natural and social sciences makes use of the concept
of hierarchy, where the separate levels of a complex entity are of conceptual and
operational interest. This framework is often visualized as a system having hierarchi-
cal—and self-replicating (Batty 2007)—properties that serve to maintain order and
promote efficiency. These properties either have emerged through natural agency or
been adopted through human agency. In many cases, a hierarchy appears because of
systemic self-organization.
   The evidence for hierarchies is widespread. Christian (2004) notes that both top-
down theories of state formation, which emphasize coercion, and bottom-up theories
of state formation, which emphasize coordination, account for the importance of hier-
archies. These organizational tiers seem to be indispensable in the management of
positive feedback loops—mechanisms linking population growth, collective learning,
and technological innovation—thereby allowing societies to transition to higher lev-
els of complexity. Moreover, hierarchies are adopted as mechanisms to support those
norms that reduce conflict between agents or social groups (Axelrod 1997). Urba-
nists like Jacobs (1961), Lynch (1981), Friedmann (1986), and Sassen (1991) have
discussed the incidence of hierarchies at several geographic scales. At one scale, they
point out that certain cities like New York, London, and Tokyo are at the top of a global
city hierarchy because they dominate as business headquarters, financial industries,
and media centers. But, at another scale, they recognize that a hierarchy is embed-
ded in a wide variety of private and public agents that are situated in these global
cities. At this scale, some sort of tiered organization is vital for internal control of
firm activities and for transnational coordination with other firms and governments.
Williamson (1975, 1985) described the role of hierarchies in economic institutions,
where the degree of hierarchy is closely tied to the nature of decision-making and the
formulation of contracts. Hierarchy is very great when the responsibility for making
decisions or negotiating contacts is concentrated in a few agents; however, when deci-
sions and negotiations are made by many individual agents or are subject to collective
approval, then hierarchy is not so great. In this literature, the twin notions of hierarchy
and inequality appear to go hand in hand.

4 The emergence of a functional hierarchy

The most serious shortcomings of CPT are its somewhat weak behavioral explanation
for the emergence of the hierarchy and its lack of a solid microeconomic foundation.
Even the simpler Christaller scheme has some difficulties in providing a convincing
story for the emergence of the regularly spaced, clustered businesses based solely on
the atomistic behavior of firms and households. Three somewhat different approaches
are now discussed: one economic and the other two evolutionary.

4.1 Spatial evolution

A somewhat different perspective on the emergence of a functional hierarchy has its
roots in dynamic modeling, and White (1974, 1977, 1978) was evidently the first to

                                                                                123
414                                                                       G. F. Mulligan et al.


explore this sort of thinking in a CPT framework. Numerous simulations for cen-
tral place populations were run where coefficients varied for population multipliers,
household transportation rates, and the fixed costs of starting up businesses. The sim-
ulations show that, when transportation costs are low, centrality beats other factors
and high-order places flourish—but when these costs grow, the distance to neighbor-
ing centers increasingly constrains household travel, restricts high-order growth, and
flattens the overall city-size distribution. At the same time, larger centers are relatively
insulated from chance downturns by the high fixed costs involved in the provision of
high-order goods. Under varying parameters, a spatial equilibrium resembling Chri-
staller’s logic invariably emerges; but the balance between transportation costs and
indivisible production costs is key to determining the final distribution of population
sizes. In these models, population imbalances in CPT systems are especially sensitive
to high-order population multipliers. However, the results endorse systemic stability
in that the simulated equilibria do not seem to depend upon the initial locations or
sizes of central places. Positive feedback loops endogenously link together growth
processes and growth constraints.
    Allen and Sanglier (1978, 1979) visualize a mixture of probabilistic and determinis-
tic forces guiding the evolution of central place systems. Entrepreneurs are thought to
calculate aggregate demand for new products, and this figure is translated into potential
employment by a logistic-type function. When two (bundled) goods are provided, a
wide number of stable solutions emerge as centers grow or decline according to their
adaptive capacity. But when a third bundle is added, the positive feedback loops related
to spatial agglomeration come into play. This function might be allocated anywhere in
the system, but it will only survive (and satisfy certain threshold requirements) when
it is allocated to a point already housing the second bundle. The winning combination
of a central location and a substantial local population proves to be critical for the
survival of this third-order activity. In their later work, Allen and Sanglier (1981a,b)
introduce commuting or crowding into this spatial model of systemic evolution. In this
framework, growth and change throughout the spatial system is seen to pass through
four distinct stages: (i) initial allocations of population and employment but only to
certain points in space; (ii) subsequent population decentralization due to crowding;
(iii) induced economic decentralization out from core areas; and, finally, (iv) ongoing
competition between a few major nodes of activity. This line of research was promis-
ing because it dealt with both the intra- and intercity forces that shape the evolution
of urban and regional systems.


4.2 Microeconomics

While CPT endorses the agglomeration of firms, it also postulates that these differ-
ent-sized clusters of firms tend to be distanced from one another. This dichotomous
behavior has its roots in Hotelling (1929) and Smithies (1941), who recognized that,
even in the face of constant customer densities, firms can—and do—switch their
incentives for location, depending upon extant market conditions. Following Lösch’s
analysis of spatial demand in a single industry, a pool of research aimed at examining
the competitive behavior of spatial firms (Norman 1986) developed. Here, it was soon

123
Central place theory and its reemergence in regional science                          415


realized that the market, or aggregate, demand facing each firm was comprised of three
adjacent forms: (i) monopoly, (ii) competitive, and (iii) super-competitive (Beckmann
and Thisse 1986). The price-elastic household demand would always provide suffi-
cient incentive for firms to seek middle locations between their spatial rivals, thereby
protecting their spatial monopolies.
    From this point of departure, two different perspectives on spatial competition
arose. From the first perspective, price behavior was really the sole consideration,
where identical firms were evenly dispersed through unbounded spatial markets. In
fact, the same mechanism outlined by Lösch was used to drive firms toward a sta-
ble equilibrium—presumably they would continue to enter the market until they were
packed so closely together that no firm could earn an economic profit; at that point, the
entire market would be in a stable equilibrium (Beckmann 1971; Stern 1972). From
the second perspective, firms were actually embedded in space where they would make
explicit price and location decisions with respect to nearest rivals (Eaton 1972). In this
context, the entire market could be either unbounded or bounded in space, a feature
that added both complexity and realism to the analysis (Mulligan and Fik 1994, 1995).
A stable equilibrium was only reached when no firm had any incentive to change its
price-output-location decision. Firms could earn a pure profit—but only as long as
this amount was insufficient to entice new entrants. However, under fairly reason-
able entry scenarios, a stable equilibrium will not always materialize in such markets
(Eaton 1976; Eaton and Lipsey 1976). In fact, various perturbations can destroy the
regular spacing of firms and allow those firms to dominate market areas of different
sizes. Spatial asymmetry can also occur if fixed costs are separated into sunk costs
and contractual obligations, where the former can restrict the free location adjustment
of firms.
    However, there have been only a few attempts made to construct a multi-good
equilibrium based on behavioral rules. One approach, by Eaton and Lipsey (1976),
tries to clarify the microeconomic underpinnings for central places by highlighting the
demand externalities of consumer shopping. By recognizing the inherent indivisibil-
ities of goods, adopting constant transportation rates, and then introducing multipur-
pose shopping as a motivation for firms to cluster, they were actually able to develop
various types of two-level hierarchies in one-dimensional markets. Here, Christaller’s
system was one of the multiple spatial equilibria that could arise. It is argued that,
as long as single- and multipurpose shopping coexist, higher order places are always
able to steal potential demand from adjacent, lower-order places. This means that, as
long as the location of firm clusters is endogenously determined by competitive forces
and not chosen by a planning agency, spatial asymmetry will often characterize the
market equilibrium.
    Yet another approach—the two-good cost-minimization model developed by
McLafferty and Ghosh (1984, 1987)—remains an admirable attempt to address the
agglomeration versus separation issue in two spatial dimensions. Using a location-
allocation model designed for public facilities, their model examines all possible con-
figurations of firm location under conditions of multipurpose shopping for dispersed
households. Each household’s decision-making calculus is embedded in the various
firm locations, where a mixture of single- and multipurpose shopping trips is chosen.
As in Eaton and Lipsey, clustered low-order firms can always steal revenues from

                                                                               123
416                                                                             G. F. Mulligan et al.


their non-clustered low-order rivals and some of these non-clustered firms might even
disappear from the landscape. A large batch of numerical simulations indicates that
multipurpose shopping invariably promotes the symmetrical hierarchy of city systems
in a manner consistent with Christaller’s logic. Depending on various price and cost
circumstances, households found at different locations might change their mix of sin-
gle- and multiple-purpose shopping trips—but the firms that service those households
always appear to agglomerate only at certain key locations on the landscape. The
authors also point out that such agglomeration is strengthened by opportunities for
comparative shopping.


4.3 Dynamic extensions and the new economic geography

CPT and the NEG have many similarities, though they differ in some key ways.1 Given
space constraints, the discussion is constrained to only briefly describe these features.
Readers interested in more detailed comparisons are referred to the numerous sources
cited here—in particular, to the Brakman et al. (2009) NEG textbook—and survey of
agglomeration economies in general can be found in Puga (2010).
   The key advantage of CPT is it can explain existing urban hierarchies including
the geographic spacing of cities and their hinterlands, plus why various goods and
services are found in particular locations. The primary criticism of the framework is
that its models typically lack microeconomic foundations, are primarily geometric,
are partial equilibrium (Fujita et al. 1999; Tabuchi and Thisse 2011, p. 241; Brakman
et al. 2009, pp. 44–46), and efforts to make them dynamic are often ad hoc (Partridge
2010). Some of these criticisms are unfair because, as just described in earlier sec-
tions, microeconomic foundations, in particular, have received considerable attention
for many decades.
   For these and other reasons, NEG formulations became popular after Krugman
(1991b) seminal paper and CPT research faded from the limelight. The base NEG
model following Krugman (1991b) typically has two regions with a traded sector
(manufacturing) produced in a Dixit–Stiglitz monopolistic competitive market with
multiple varieties, increasing returns to scale, and labor is the only input. There is
a non-traded sector (farming) produced in a perfectly competitive market with con-
stant returns to scale. Utility is a nested Cobb-Douglas function with manufacturing
demand for individual varieties being determined by a Dixit–Stiglitz CES utility func-
tion. There are no transportation costs for food, while manufacturing transportation
costs are an iceberg function. Manufacturing labor is mobile, in which labor moves to
the region offering the highest real wage. Later NEG models kept much of the same
form but added other features that somewhat improved the realism of the model such
as adding a non-traded housing sector (see Brakman et al. 2009 for more details). The
key advantage of the NEG model is that it is an endogenous model in which dynamics
can be traced through in simulation form.


1 As pointed out by an anonymous referee, one distinction between CPT and NEG is that CPT is a view
of the spatial hierarchy, while NEG is methodologically defined.


123
Central place theory and its reemergence in regional science                                          417


   In simple terms, the key difference between CPT and NEG is that CPT models are
explicitly spatial (they can easily be shown on a map, for instance), and NEG models
are typically a spatial in the sense there are usually just two regions with most of the
focus placed on dynamics after changes in key parameters. Likewise, CPT focuses
on the location of specific types of industries, as well as the relative returns to scale
across different industries that lead to spatial concentration—that is, higher- versus
lower-ordered services (though Tabuchi and Thisse 2011 are a counterexample). NEG
frameworks stress transportation costs and a general equilibrium formulation that pro-
duces endogenous dynamics.
   NEG models address many of the shortcomings of CPT by providing microeco-
nomic foundations that incorporate, among other things, increasing returns to scale,
monopolistic competition, and a “love of variety” among firms and households (see
Brakman et al. 2009 for a comprehensive survey). A self-reinforcing pattern of increas-
ing agglomeration can dynamically take hold due to the advantages that suppliers and
customers have as a result of close access to inputs and outputs, and larger cities
have more variety that attracts firms and households. In most NEG models, falling
transportation costs induce more concentration so that industries can take advantage
of the increasing returns to scale. Still, NEG models have shortcomings of their own
(Neary 2001; Nijkamp 2000; Ottaviano et al. 2002). Some of these include restric-
tive production functions and the tendency for knife-edge, or “catastrophic” results
that are sensitive to small parameter changes. For example, the slightest changes in
transportation costs in the base models can sometimes lead to everything from full
agglomeration in either region or equal shares in either region. The increasing returns
assumptions suggest that large shocks may lead to catastrophic consequences that are
not generally supported by empirical work based on natural and man-made disasters.2
   Another criticism of NEG models is the use of unrealistic assumptions such as ice-
berg transportation costs (Neary 2001; Nijkamp 2000), which is done for analytical
simplicity. For example, Bosker and Garretsen (2010) show that even small changes
in how transportation costs are specified in empirical NEG models can lead to wildly
different implications. There are also important theoretical shortcomings from iceberg
transportation costs. McCann (2005, 2007) and Fingleton and McCann (2007) show
that iceberg transportation costs are inconsistent with the distance cost pricing for
logistics and transportation, as well as for explaining the movement people and ideas,
which theoretically requires square root terms to be consistent with transaction costs
models (also see the discussion in Bosker and Garretsen 2010, pp. 499–501).
   Perhaps even more problematic about NEG models is that, when realistic factors
such commuting or amenities are added into NEG models, their complexity quickly
becomes overwhelming (Tabuchi and Thisse 2002, 2006). For example, Partridge
(2010) argues that NEG models do a poor job of describing contemporary growth
processes in the United States, compared to other explanations such as amenities.


2 For example, Davis and Weinstein (2002) find that despite the heavy bombing that Japanese cities with-
stood during World War II, they had significantly recovered by the end of the 1950s. Bosker et al. (2007)
found a similar pattern when considering the devastating effects of Allied bombing and military campaigns
on the German urban system. Xiao (2011) is an example of a study that finds that natural disasters such as
floods have generally short-term effects on regional economies.


                                                                                             123
418                                                                                G. F. Mulligan et al.


Krugman (2010) notes that NEG models are better at describing developing country
dynamics such as in China or India (see Hering and Poncet 2010 for an application to
China).
    Trying to overcome some of criticisms of CPT, Fujita et al. (1999) adopt an NEG
model to show how a CPT hierarchy can arise during initial territorial settlement—
though one weakness of their model is that it does not lead to the spatial layering of
services that defines CPT. Tabuchi and Thisse (2011) add further richness to the Fujita
et al. (1999) framework by showing how an urban hierarchy can develop in which
larger central places have more industries and higher-ordered services, and where
the very top of the hierarchy is persistent. Yet, their representation does not capture
empirical regularities such as Zipf’s law, which would give it more realism. Recent
work suggests that CPT has some significant advantages for describing such empirical
regularities compared to other approaches. For example, Hsu (forthcoming) uses an
equilibrium entry model—with micro foundations—to derive a CPT representation
that (i) meets the CPT hierarchy property (higher-ordered cities have the same indus-
tries as in lower-level cities and more); (ii) is consistent with Zipf’s law, and (iii) is
consistent with the recently discovered number-average-size rule (Mori et al. 2008)
that relates the number of cities in which an industry is located with the average pop-
ulation of those cities. Further, Hsu and Holmes (2009) use a dynamic programming
model to show that Hsu’s (forthcoming) model can lead to optimal results from a
social planners’ perspective. While it may be too early to claim a rebirth in CPT as the
leading model of urban systems, the inflexibility and lack of spatial realism in NEG
and other frameworks are spurring renewed interest in the older framework.

5 Growth and development

The predictions resulting from CPT have strong implications for the growth and devel-
opment of a nation’s urban system and the development of its regions. This section
briefly describes empirical tests of CPT for across several dimensions—the spatial
structure of industries, the stability of the urban hierarchy, growth across the hierar-
chy, rural–urban interdependence, and commuting. Generally, the first two sub-sec-
tions stress the development of larger central places and subsequently smaller cities,
while the later two-subsections relate to intraregion dynamics and regional growth
in the CPT framework. One caveat is the general literature is immense, and so the
discussion is constrained to the more recent North American literature.

5.1 Industrial structure across cities

The key distinction between CPT and other urban system theories is that CPT places
the spatial nature of the system at the forefront. Thus, while other urban system theo-
ries also describe city types, size distribution, and industry structure (Henderson 1974;
Gabaix 1999; Duranton and Puga 2001; Eeckhout 2004), the discussion here focuses
on those studies with a strong spatial framework drawn from CPT.3

3 Note that Beckmann (1958) did tie the power law for city-size distributions to CPT, but the framework
lacked an economic model (Hsu, forthcoming).


123
Central place theory and its reemergence in regional science                                       419


    While standard CPT is static, previous sections have described how extensions of
it imply dynamic growth patterns. Because the highest tiered central places attract
industries with the greatest scale economies, proximity to the highest tiered central
places allow nearby locations—including smaller communities—to take advantage
of close access to these services, allowing them to grow faster. Olfert and Stabler
(1999) note that input–output linkages also greatly favor the top of the hierarchy.
Using Canadian data from Saskatchewan, they find that an exogenous increase in
expenditures in the lowest tier place leads to almost equal amounts of induced expen-
ditures in the highest tiered city in that region—a sign of the high leakages for the
lowest to highest tiers. Overall, they report that multipliers are about double in the
highest tiered central place as in the lowest tiered place. The advantages found in
highest tiered cities underlie Polèse and Shearmur (2004b, 2006) examination of the
relative concentration of industry types across the urban hierarchy.4 In defining a
core/periphery delineation, they divide the Canadian urban hierarchy into tiers based
on metropolitan area population (including a rural tier) and distance to a highest tiered
metropolitan area (more than 500,000 population). Over various periods between
1971 and 2001, they consistently find a cross-sectional pattern wherein high-order
services concentrate in core cities and nearby locations. Likewise, this pattern is very
stable and may be accelerating over time.5 However, there is industry churning: as
advanced industries become standardized, they are crowded out of the core central
places due to cost considerations and commonly end up relocating to more remote
locations.
    Using data from the United States, Klaus and Fafchamps (2006) find that ser-
vice industries are generally concentrating—but, also, that, as manufacturing becomes
increasingly standardized, it is deconcentrating. However, Partridge et al. (2008a) find
that remoteness has neutral sectoral effects—or, in other words, that industries are
concentrating about equally.
    Probably the most interesting recent work for testing the industry location features
of CPT has revolved around the number-average-size rule (NAS) (Mori et al. 2008).
As noted above, NAS relates the number of cities in which an industry is located
with the average population of those cities. As shown first by Mori et al. (2009) and
then by Mori and Smith (2011) with a more advanced clustering approach, the NAS
rule holds for Japan, whereas Hsu (forthcoming) shows that it also applies for the
United States. Moreover, the NAS rule is closely associated with Zipf’s Law (Rank
Size Rule) and the hierarchy principle that forms the core of CPT’s tiering of cities
in which subsequently larger cities have higher-ordered services (Mori et al. 2008;
Mori and Smith 2011). This recent CPT empirical work illustrates that the industry
hierarchy effects that underlie CPT is at work at describing central places up and
down the urban hierarchy. More work is needed to assess how the spatial disposi-
tion of industries is evolving in advanced economies, but CPT remains an excellent
guide.


4 Polèse and Shearmur’s industry breakdown tends to be on the basis of demand for specialized labor and
market threshold effects (e.g., Wensley and Stabler 1998; Shonkwiler and Harris 1993).
5 Polèse et al. (2007) find a similar pattern for Spain.



                                                                                          123
420                                                                     G. F. Mulligan et al.


5.2 Stability of the urban hierarchy

The CPT agglomeration patterns described above suggest that upper-tier central places
have advantages that allow them to persistently remain near the top of the hierarchy,
while there is likely more churning near the bottom because lower-tiered places pos-
sess fewer agglomeration advantages. Indeed, Black and Henderson (2003) conclude
this pattern applies for the United States. In examining decade-by-decade data over
the 1900–1990 period, they find that the urban hierarchy is relatively stable—though
with some churning—but the top is especially stable (Dobkins and Ioannides 2001).
Polèse and Denis-Jacob (2010) examine the stability of the top-ten cities in the urban
hierarchy across 74 countries over the twentieth century. They find that the placement
of these cities in the hierarchy is very stable, illustrating the inherent advantages that
large cities have in maintaining their dominance. Their finding suggests that American
patterns such as the rise of Sunbelt cities (for example, Atlanta, Dallas, and Phoenix)
in the late twentieth century are more of the exception on an international basis. Like-
wise, reversals of primate cities (for example, Toronto and Montreal) are rare and are
functions of major political or cultural shocks, not economic forces (Polèse and Shear-
mur 2004a). Yet, a key implication of findings that the hierarchy is stable is that policy
efforts to help lagging regions will likely fail unless the underlying dynamics that pro-
duced the urban hierarchy are altered. It is worth pointing out here that some analysts
(Ioannides and Overman 2004, p. 132) have commented that “the precise implica-
tions” of NEG models “for growth in a system of cities are pretty fuzzy.” Though
some progress has been made—see Fujita and Mori (1997, 2005), Mori (1997), Fujita
et al. (1999), Overman and Ioannides (2001),—it seems to the present authors that
CPT, with its built in systems dynamics (Berry 1964), may, in fact, provide a more
straightforward conceptual foundation.


5.3 Regional growth in a CPT framework

The above two sections discussed empirical studies about the location of cities and
the stability of the urban system in a CPT framework (especially at the top), but it did
not consider how CPT can explain growth dynamics at a regional and national scale.
Such research was hampered in early CPT research because of the primitive nature of
geographic information systems (GIS) technology. The lack of GIS technology limited
empirical efforts to examine the effect of CPT across an entire economic landscape, like
the United States or Europe. Advanced GIS technology has changed this. For example,
Partridge et al. (2008a,b, 2009) use a CPT-based framework to assess county-level eco-
nomic activity across the entire continental United States. Their urban hierarchy from
top to bottom also includes rural areas and is similar to that of Polèse and Denis-Jacob
(2010). Partridge et al.’s innovation is that they explicitly introduce distance costs
to reach all of the higher-tiered urban areas for each county, particularly accounting
for the incremental distance costs for reaching each succeeding higher tier to obtain
services that are not available at the subsequent lower tier, which is consistent with
a CPT framework. Partridge et al. (2008a,b) find that consistent with agglomeration
predictions from CPT, employment and population are moving closer to higher-tiered

123
Central place theory and its reemergence in regional science                          421


urban areas, though not necessarily within them. Moreover, Partridge et al. (2009) find
that housing prices and wages are following a similar pattern. Partridge et al. (2008a,b)
find that these agglomeration forces accelerated after 1950 and so argue that twenti-
eth century improvements in transportation and information technology favored the
core, not the periphery. Wu and Gopinath (2008) also draw similar conclusions using
a definition of remoteness based on adjacency to metropolitan areas in an empirical
framework that uses spatial econometrics.
    Because market potential plays a much smaller explanatory role than incremental
distance in Partridge et al.’s results (2008a; 2008b) empirical results, they downplay
other explanations such as NEG because the latter would predict that market potential
is the driving factor, while CPT predicts that it is the geographic proximity in the hier-
archy that matters. Likewise, because other agglomeration explanations—including
knowledge spill overs—are more geographically limited (e.g., Rosenthal and Strange
2008), this suggests that explanations within a CPT framework are probable causes.
Similarly, Portnov and Schwartz (2009) show that European growth is also consis-
tent with CPT representations, though their analysis does not explicitly rule out other
possible explanations.


5.4 CPT and economic development policy

The CPT framework has long been seen as an imperative for policymakers and other
actors in functional economic regions to cooperate in public service delivery, infra-
structure provision, and economic development. This call makes economic sense when
there is a need to internalize spillovers and when there are network effects and econ-
omies of scale. In particular, the growing importance of agglomeration forces—as
implied in Partridge et al. (2008a,b) and Wu and Gopinath (2008)—along with rising
industry threshold effects—suggest that rural areas have much to gain from working
on regional basis with urban areas (Fox and Kumar 1965; Berry 1970; Wensley and
Stabler 1998; Olfert and Stabler 1999; Partridge and Olfert 2011; Carruthers et al.
forthcoming; Castle et al. 2011).
   Modern notions of regional economic development using CPT differ from how
the framework was originally envisioned by Christaller (1933) and Lösch (1941).
Specifically, rather than input–output linkages between and among firms and house-
holds, contemporary regional linkages are arguably more commonly established
via commuting patterns. In particular, this trend has accelerated through bet-
ter highways and employment declines of rural primary sector industries due to
labor saving productivity growth. Thus, it is often the case that the best eco-
nomic development strategy for lower-ordered locations is to increase their qual-
ity of life to attract migrants from urban centers and commuters that are tied to
them (Henry et al. 1997; Renkow and Hoover 2000; Carruthers and Vias 2005).
Likewise, growth center approaches that stress growth in the highest level tier are
based on the premise that the best rural development strategy is an urban-led strategy
that takes advantage of the commuting linkages (Ali et al. 2011; Goetz et al. 2010). Fox
and Kumar (1965) and Ali et al. (2011) are examples that illustrate the utility of CPT
for understanding rural–urban regions based on commuting. While there are strong

                                                                               123
422                                                                     G. F. Mulligan et al.


arguments for collaboration within such regions, there is a need for further research as
to whether these regions should form an overarching regional government or whether
it is best to leave multiple actors in place even if it leads to fragmented governance
—that is, what is the proper centralization in regional governments, if any (Haughwout
1999, 1997)? Examples of analyses exploring the spatial consequences of different
arrangements of land use governance include Carruthers (2003) and Ulfarsson and
Carruthers (2006).


6 Planning

The United States has no national urban land use policy, which makes it all the more
imperative that the market-driven evolution of its urban and regional systems is under-
stood on its own terms: planners and other policymakers require knowledge of both
inter- and intraregional dynamics in order to organize their thinking and take appro-
priate action. This section sets out some of the ways in which CPT enters the plan-
ning arena and informs planners’ decision-making processes both across and within
regions. Along the way, it furthers a central argument of this paper—that, at least
from a normative standpoint, NEG and other “competing” models should be viewed
as complementary, not alternative, frameworks.


6.1 Interregional planning

As just noted, in the United States, there is no territorial urban policy—land use
is generally governed through so-called home rule authority, meaning at the most
local of levels—so, at present, there is no direct role for interregional planning, per
se. That said, planners do regularly engage in urban and regional economic devel-
opment, plus in the process of ensuring that functional economic regions, like those
discussed throughout this paper, perform effectively and interact effectively. Moreover,
activist organizations, like the Regional Plan Association6 (RPA) of the New York–
New Jersey–Connecticut metropolitan area, advocate for adopting an approach to plan-
ning that is essentially organized around the spatial hierarchy of CPT. For example,
America 2050,7 a project of the RPA, has identified ten emerging mega-regions that
it argues for treating—from a policy perspective—as functional economic regions:
(i) the Northeast, (ii) the Great Lakes; (iii) the Piedmont Atlantic; (iv) Florida;
(v) the Gulf Coast; (vi) the Texas Triangle; (vii) the Arizona Sun Corridor;
(viii) Southern California; (ix) Northern California; and, finally, located in the Pacific
Northwest, (x) Cascadia. According to Pierce and Johnson (2008, p. 245), these regions
are directly analogous to “the Global Integration Zones identified by European and
Asian planners [and] all show strong linkages through overlapping suburbs, increased
commuting between metro areas, strong transportation connections, and similarities
in their industrial clusters.” Figure 2 presents a map of the American constellation of

6 See: http://www.rpa.org.
7 See: http://www.america2050.org.



123
Central place theory and its reemergence in regional science                         423




Fig. 2 The American constellation of core-based statistical areas



core-based statistical areas following Pierce and Johnson (2008). Although they do
not invoke CPT by name, these policy entrepreneurs are referring directly to the world
it describes when they argue for an expanded role for regional planning on the basis
of functional economic regions that are embedded within a national hierarchy.
    And, this kind of thinking is more than just theoretical: at the time of this writing
(fall 2011), three cabinet-level federal agencies in the United States—the Depart-
ment of Housing and Urban Development, the Department of Transportation, and the
Environmental Protection Agencies—are engaged in the Partnership for Sustainable
Communities,8 an ambitious effort that explicitly recognizes the need for interregional
planning. Among other activities, in 2010 alone, this program distributed more than
$400 billion in grants, many of which were dedicated to regional planning activities.
In this very tangible sense, CPT represents a theoretical framework capable of guiding
planners and other policymakers as they take on problems that are increasingly com-
plicated and interconnected across political jurisdictions—and often involve multiple
metropolitan areas.
    Although it is true that NEG models are capable of guiding some forms of pub-
lic policy (see, for example, Baldwin et al. 2003), these models tend to be aspatial
(as already discussed) and, more even problematic, analytically difficult to the point
where they lack practical relevance to policymakers engaged in day-to-day planning.
Among the key strengths of CPT are its intuitive appeal and ability to describe why—
plus how, where, and when—systems of cities materialize on the economic landscape
to both technical and general audiences. It certainly cannot do everything that many
social scientists demand of a holistic economic theory, but there is no disputing its
utility for providing general explanations for, and predictions of, otherwise intractably
complex real-world phenomena. For this reason, it seems that, instead of competitors,


8 http://www.sustainablecommunities.gov/pdf/FactSheet.pdf.



                                                                              123
424                                                                                   G. F. Mulligan et al.


CPT and NEG models may, in fact, be complements capable of contributing different
forms of insight useful for different purposes.
   This point is an important one because, so far, NEG models—for all of their power
and elegance—have had little to offer in terms of practical advice for urban planners
and policymakers working on interregional issues. It can be hard to derive testable
hypotheses from NEG models (Head and Mayer 2004), and, for this reason, there are
few, if any, direct lessons for planning in any of its recent advances on urban systems—
see, for example, Fujita and Mori (1997, 2005), Mori (1997), Fujita et al. (1999). And,
for this reason, it is unfortunate that, as a matter of scientific research, NEG models
all but completely eclipsed the CPT framework for a 20-year period. (According to
Google Scholar, Krugman’s monograph, Geography and Trade, has been cited 7,097
times since it was published in 1991, compared to the 2,025 that the English version of
Christaller’s monograph, Central Places in Southern Germany, has been cited since
being published in 1966.)
   As Smolin (1997) forcefully argues in The Trouble With Physics (referring to super
string theory), trends in scientific research can become as destructive as they are pro-
ductive when certain theories are pursued to the point where they end up closing
out other useful theories.9 None of this is to say that CPT is the perfect tool for the
advancement of an interregional planning agenda—just that, from an applied per-
spective, the regional science community should reconsider what the framework has
done to advance the pool of knowledge on development patterns and processes across
regions before dropping it on account of its ad hoc nature and other shortcomings. In
sum, no theory is perfect and it seems best not to discard (or disregard) CPT even if, as
NEG proponents (Fujita et al. 1999, p. 27) suggest, it is “at best a description, rather
than an explanation, of the economy’s spatial structure.”

6.2 Intraregional planning

As stated at the onset of this section, the United States has no territorial urban policy,
so planning is an expressly local enterprise that takes place within regions—and, in
the main, individual communities. Urbanization is inherently complex, but it is none-
theless systematic, consisting of layers of patterns that are repeated across multiple,
tiered scales of the sort that CPT describes (see Batty 2007). Thus, in developing a
normative theory of urban form, Lynch (1981) emphasizes physical regularities that
emerge across the spatial hierarchy of development—or, as Berry (1961) famously
pointed out: just as there are systems of cities, the cities embedded in these systems
are systems themselves. This stylized fact—clearly illustrated in Fig. 3, a map of the
contemporary Northeast megalopolis (Gottmann 1961)—holds many practical impli-
cations for planners, some of which are outlined below.
   Foremost, the most obvious application of CPT in the practice of intraregional
planning is that it describes the general frame of urban spatial structure (Anas et al.

9 In the natural sciences, general relativity and quantum mechanics, inarguably two of humanities crown-
ing achievements, famously contradict one another—meaning that one or both is somehow incorrect on a
foundational level, but, even as scientists drive toward a “unified” theory, few seriously suggest throwing
either one out.


123
Central place theory and its reemergence in regional science                        425




Fig. 3 The Northeast megalopolis


1998) both through time and across geographic space. For more than 100 years, dating
to at least Howard’s (1902) Garden Cities of Tomorrow, planners have thought about
urban form as a functional hierarchy and have set out transportation networks and
pursued policies aimed at shaping settlement patterns accordingly. In this sense, the
fundamental critique mentioned above—that CPT is a description, not an explanation,
of the economic landscape—holds less relevance to planners, who need to understand
the nuts and bolts of how cities are put together, than it does for theorists, who ask
more fundamental questions about why there are cities in the first place. For example,
in their classic paper, Friedmann and Miller (1965, p. 314) suggest that the city should
not be viewed as a monolithic “physical entity,” but, instead, as “a pattern of point
locations and connecting flows of people, information, money, and commodities.”
This claim was prescient in many ways and has recently been used as a point of depar-
ture for examining recent land use change throughout the United States (Carruthers et
al. forthcoming). So, on a basic level, CPT offers planners a powerful way of under-
standing the fabric of urbanization and making decisions—including transportation
investments, allocating land use, and more—affecting the overall functionality of the
regions in which they operate.

                                                                             123
426                                                                        G. F. Mulligan et al.


   Moreover, CPT’s traditions of market and locational analysis hold important impli-
cations for the siting of centralized facilities, ranging from shopping centers to water
treatment plants. For example, the last major text on CPT (Berry and Parr 1988) was
devoted entirely to describing the nature of market areas and what kind of services
should be located where—and at what (spatial) frequency. Knowing how to evaluate
such issues is of no small consequence to planners—or, for that matter, real estate
developers—whose decisions on zoning and other factors that affect retail and busi-
ness location impact not only the level of access to goods and services that residents
enjoy, but numerous other matters of consequence, including access to jobs and even
the strength of the local tax base (see, for example Kaiser et al. 1995; Hopkins 2001).
   At a regional level, some of the first growth management, or smart growth, initia-
tives targeted “developments of regional impact,” or, in other words, large, centralized
facilities whose replication would result in bifurcated demand and other inefficiencies
(Popper 1981). Such interventions are highly controversial (Fischel 1989); however,
so, in order to be credible, planners require a basis for understanding the nature of the
organizational hierarchy of the economic landscapes they regulate—and, as argued
throughout this paper, CPT offers an excellent means of doing so.
   Further, a similar logic extends to the planning of infrastructure and public goods
and services. Urban sprawl, a dominant mode of land use in the United States—and,
increasingly, elsewhere in the world (Bruegmann 2005)—is commonly criticized by
members of the planning profession and citizen activists for being wasteful and inef-
ficient. Yet, it is also true that the nation is rich in territory and there is no imperative
in terms of the amount of land available to promote more compact development (see,
for example, Gordon and Richardson 1997). What’s needed, then, are means of objec-
tively discriminating among alternative land use outcomes (Talen and Ellis 2002), and
the CPT framework provides a basis for doing so. There is evidence that low-density,
spatially expansive patterns of land use are indeed more expensive to provide certain
services to than high-density, compact alternatives (Carruthers and Ulfarsson 2003,
2008; Hortas-Rico and Solé-Ollé 2010) and CTP helps explain why: large facilities,
when centrally sited, create efficiencies both in terms of the specific functions they
fulfill—for example, water treatment (Hopkins et al. 2004)—and the infrastructure
used to distribute their output (Mulligan 1991, 2000). Going back to Lynch’s (1981)
normative theory of urban form to criteria in particular stand out: (i) efficiency, which
suggests cost-effectiveness is better; and (ii) equity, which suggests that residents
living in low-density, outlying locations should not be subsidized by those living in
more cost-effective high-density, centralized locations. Indeed, a violation of these
principles suggests that a market failure has occurred (Brueckner 2000) and that the
use of development impact fees or some other regulatory intervention may be justified.


7 Summary and conclusion

CPT has clear advantages for describing both inter and intraregional spatial patterns of
economic activity and urbanization—and for informing planning and other forms of
policymaking. Its main shortcomings are its supposed lack of microeconomic foun-
dations and lack of a general equilibrium approach. Of course, one reason for this

123
Central place theory and its reemergence in regional science                                       427


shortcoming is that CPT is very rich in describing both industry location and settle-
ment patterns in a manner that is explicitly spatial—its very realism is what makes it
difficult to analytically model in a general equilibrium fashion. With renewed interest
in CPT, there is a distinct need for further testing its empirical predictions with GIS
and micro data on firm and household location decisions. Along with assessing how
well CPT fits empirical regularities, there is also a need to evaluate whether or not
CPT can inform forecasts of the continued evolution of urban and regional systems.
In terms of policymaking, there is a need to better understand whether the functional
economic areas that fall from CPT can be used for governance—and to better articulate
its utility for evaluating urban form. In these ways and more the CPT framework is
ripe for additional research that places it on more equal footing with its complements,
such as NEG models.


References

Allen PM, Sanglier M (1978) Dynamic model of urban growth. J Soc Biol Struct 1:265–280
Allen PM, Sanglier M (1979) A dynamic model of growth in a central place system. Geograph Anal 11:
     256–272
Allen PM, Sanglier M (1981a) A dynamic model of a central place system—II. Geograph Anal 13:149–164
Allen PM, Sanglier M (1981b) Urban evolution, self-organization, and decisionmaking. Environ Planning
     A 13:167–183
Alao N, Dacey MF, Davies O, Denike KG, Huff J, Parr JB, Webber MJ (1977) Christaller central place
     structures. Northwestern University, Evanston
Ali K, Olfert MR, Partridge MD (2011) Urban footprints in rural Canada: employment spillovers by city
     size. Reg Stud 45:239–260
Anas A, Arnott R, Small KA (1998) Urban spatial structure. J Econ Perspect 38:1426–1464
Arthur WB (1994) Increasing returns and path dependence in the economy. University of Michigan Press,
     Ann Arbor
Axelrod R (1997) The complexity of cooperation. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Baldwin R, Forslid R, Martin P, Ottaviano G, Robert-Nicoud F (2003) Economic geography and public
     policy. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Batty M (2007) Cities and complexity: understanding cities with cellular automata, agent-based models,
     and fractals. The MIT Press, Cambridge
Beavon KSO (1977) Central place theory: a reinterpretation. Longman, London
Beckmann MJ (1958) City hierarchies and the distribution of city size. Econ Dev Cult Change 6:243–248
Beckmann M (1968) Location theory. Random House, New York
Beckmann MJ (1971) Equilibrium versus optimum: spacing of firms and patterns of market areas. Northeast
     Reg Sci Rev 1:1–20
Beckmann MJ, Thisse J-F (1986) The location of production activities. In: Nijkamp P (ed) Handbook of
     regional and urban economics, vol 1. North-Holland, Amsterdam pp 21–95
Berry BJL (1964) Cities as systems within systems of cities. Pap Reg Sci 31:147–163
Berry BJL (1967) Geography of market centers and retail distribution. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs
Berry BJL (1970) Labor market participation and regional potential. Growth Change 1:3–10
Berry BJL, Horton FE (1970) Geographic perspectives on urban systems. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs
Berry BJL, Parr JB (1988) Market centers and retail location. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs
Black D, Henderson V (2003) Urban evolution in the USA. J Econ Geogr 3:342–372
Blumenfeld H (1955) The economic base of the metropolis. J Am Inst Planners 21:114–132
Bosker EM, Brakman S, Garretsen H, Schramm M (2007) Looking for multiple equilibrium when
     geography matters: German city growth and the WW II Shock. J Urban Econ 61:151–169
Bosker EM, Garretsen H (2010) Trade costs in empirical New Economic Geography. Pap Reg Sci 89:
     485–511
Brakman S, Garretsen H, van Marrewijk C (2009) The introduction to geographical economics. Cambridge
     University Press, Cambridge


                                                                                          123
428                                                                                   G. F. Mulligan et al.


Brueckner JK (2000) Urban sprawl: diagnosis and remedies. Int Reg Sci Rev 23:160–171
Bruegmann R (2005) Sprawl: a compact history. University of Chicago Press, Chicago
Carruthers JI (2003) Growth at the fringe: the influence of political fragmentation in United States metro-
      politan areas. Pap Reg Sci 82:472–499
Carruthers JI, Hepp S, Knaap GJ, Renner RN The American way of land use: a spatial hazard analysis of
      changes through time. Int Reg Sci Rev (forthcoming)
Carruthers JI, Ulfarsson GF (2003) Urban sprawl and the cost of public services. Environ Planning B
      30:503–522
Carruthers JI, Vias AC (2005) Urban, suburban, and exurban sprawl in the Rocky Mountain West: evidence
      from regional adjustment models. J Reg Sci 41:21–48
Carruthers JI, Ulfarsson GF (2008) Does “Smart Growth” matter to public finance? Urban Stud 45:1791–
      1823
Castle E, Wu JJ, Weber BA (2011) Place orientation and rural–urban interdependence. Appl Econ Policy
      Perspect 33:179–204
Christaller W (1933) Die zentralen orte in Süddeutschland. Fischer, Jena. Translation: Baskin CW (1966)
      Central places in southern Germany. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs
Christian D (2004) Maps of time. University of California Press, Berkeley
Davis DR, Weinstein DE (2002) Bombs, bones and breakpoints: the geography of economic activity. Am
      Econ Rev 92:1269–1289
Dobkins LH, Ioannides YM (2001) Spatial interactions among cities. Reg Sci Urban Econ 31:701–731
Duranton G, Puga D (2001) Nursery cities: urban diversity, process innovation, and the life cycle of prod-
      ucts. Am Econ Rev 91:1454–1477
Eaton BC (1972) Spatial competition revisited. Can J Econ 5:268–278
Eaton BC (1976) Free entry in one-dimensional markets: pure profits and multiple equilibria. J Reg Sci
      16:21–33
Eaton BC, Lipsey RG (1976) The non-uniqueness of equilibrium in the Löschian economic model. Am
      Econ Rev 66:77–93
Eaton BC, Lipsey RG (1979) Comparison shopping and the clustering of homogeneous firms. J Reg Sci
      19:421–435
Eeckhout J (2004) Gibrat’s law for (all) cities. Am Econ Rev 94:1429–1451
Fik TJ (1988) Spatial competition and price reporting in retail food markets. Econ Geogr 64:29–44
Fik TJ, Mulligan GF (1990) Spatial flows and competing central places: towards a general theory of hier-
      archical interaction. Environ Planning A 22:527–549
Fingleton B, McCann P (2007) Sinking the iceberg? On the treatment of transport costs in new economic
      geography. In: Fingleton B (ed) New directions in economic geography. Edward Elgar, Cheltenham
Finn A, Louviere JJ (1996) Shopping center image, consideration, and choice: anchor store consideration.
      J Bus Res 35:241–251
Fischel W (1989) Centralized control: do we really want a Double-Veto system? J Am Planning Assoc
      54:205–206
Fotheringham AS (1983) A new set of spatial-interaction models: the theory of competing destinations.
      Environ Planning A 15:15–36
Fox KA, Kumar TK (1965) The functional economic area: delineation and implications for economic anal-
      ysis and policy. Pap Reg Sci Assoc 15:57–85
Friedmann J (1986) The world city hypothesis. Dev Change 17:69–83
Friedmann J, Miller J (1965) The urban field. J Am Planning Assoc 31:312–320
Fujita M (2009) Dynamics of innovation fields with endogenous heterogeneity of people. In: Karlsson C,
      Cheshire P, Andersson Å, Stough R (eds) New directions in regional economic development. Springer,
      Berlin pp 59–78
Fujita M, Mori T (2005) Transport development and the evolution of economic geography. Portuguese Econ
      J 4:129–156
Fujita M, Mori T (1997) Structural stability and evolution of urban systems. Reg Sci Urban Econ
      27:399–442
Fujita M, Krugman P, Mori T (1999) On the evolution of hierarchical urban systems. Eur Econ Rev
      43:209–251
Fujita M, Krugman P, Venables AJ (1999) The spatial economy: cities, regions, and international trade.
      MIT Press, Cambridge
Gabaix X (1999) Zipf’s law for cities: an explanation. Q J Econ 114:739–767



123
Central place theory and its reemergence in regional science                                          429


Glaeser EL, Maré DC (2001) Cities and Skills. J Labor Econ 19:316–342
Goetz SJ, Han Y, Findeis JL, Brasier KJ (2010) U.S. commuting networks and economic growth: measure-
     ment and implications for spatial policy. Growth Change 41:276–302
Golledge RG, Stimson RJ (1997) Spatial behavior. Guilford Press, New York
Golledge GR, Rushton G, Clark WAV (1966) Some spatial characteristics of Iowa’s dispersed population
     and their implications for the grouping of central place functions. Econ Geogr 42:261–272
Gordon P, Richardson HW (1997) Are compact cities a desirable planning goal? J Am Planning Assoc
     63:95–106
Haggett P (1965) Locational analysis in geography. Edward Arnold, London
Haining RP (1983) Modeling intraurban price competition: an example of gasoline retailing. J Reg Sci
     23:517–528
Hall P (1998) Cities in civilization. Weidenfeld and Nicolson, London
Haughwout AF (1997) Central city infrastructure investment and suburban house values. Reg Sci Urban
     Econ 27:199–215
Haughwout AF (1999) Regional fiscal cooperation in metropolitan areas: an exploration. J Policy Anal
     Manage 18:579–600
Head K, Mayer J (2004) The Empirics of Agglomeration and Trade. In: Henderson JV, Thisse JF (eds)
     Handbook of urban and regional economics, vol 4. North-Holland, The Netherlands
Henderson JV (1974) The sizes and types of cities. Am Econ Rev 64:640–656
Henry MS, Barkley DL, Bao S (1997) The Hinterland’s stake in metropolitan area growth. J Reg Sci
     37:479–501
Hering L, Poncet S (2010) Market access and individual wages: evidence from China. Rev Econ Stat
     92:145–159
Hopkins LD (2001) Urban development: the logic of making plans. Island Press, Washington
Hopkins LD, Xu X, Knaap GJ (2004) Economies of scale in wastewater treatment and planning for urban
     growth. Environ Plann B Plann Des 31:879–893
Hortas-Rico M, Solé-Ollé A (2010) Does urban sprawl increase the costs of providing local public services?
     evidence from Spanish municipalities. Urban Stud 47:1513–1540
Hotelling H (1929) Stability in competition. Econ J 39:41–57
Howard E (1902) Garden Cities of To-morrow. Faber and Faber, London
Hsu W-T Central place theory and city size distribution. Econ J (forthcoming)
Hsu W-T, Holmes TJ (2009) Optimal city hierarchy: a dynamic programming approach to central place
     theory. Department of Economics, University of Minnesota, Available at: http://www.econ.umn.edu/_
     holmes/papers/city_optimal.pdf. (downloaded July 12, 2011)
Huff D (1963) A probabilistic of consumer behavior. Pap Proc Reg Sci Assoc 7:81–90
Ioannides YM, Overman HG (2004) Spatial evolution of the U.S. urban system. J Econ Geogr 4:131–156
Jacobs J (1961) The Death and Life of Great American Cities. Modern Library, USA
Kaiser EJ, Godschalk DR, Chapin SF (1995) Urban land use planning. University of Illinois Press, Chicago
King LJ (1984) Central place theory. Sage, Beverly Hills
Klaus D, Fafchamps M (2006) Employment concentration across U.S. counties. Reg Sci Urban Econ
     36:482–509
Krugman P (1991a) Geography and trade. MIT Press, Cambridge
Krugman P (1991b) Increasing returns and economic geography. J Polit Econ 99:483–499
Krugman P (2010) The new economic geography, now middle aged. Paper Prepared for presentation to
     the Association of American Geographers Meetings, Washington, DC, April 16, 2010. Available at:
     http://www.princeton.edu/~pkrugman/aag.pdf. Accessed 15 May 2010
Lloyd PE, Dicken P (1977) Location in space, 2nd edn. Harper and Row, New York
Lösch A (1941) Die raumliche ordnung der wirtshcaft. Fischer, Jena. Translation: Woglom WH, Stolper
     WP (1954) The economics of location. Yale University, New Haven
Louviere J (1974) Predicting the response to real stimulus objects from an abstract evaluation of their
     attributes: the case of trout streams. J Appl Psychol 59:572–577
Lynch K (1981) Good city form. MIT Press, Cambridge
Marshall A (1920) Principles of economics. Macmillan, London
Martin R, Sunley P (1996) Paul Krugman’s geographical economics and its implications for regional devel-
     opment theory: a critical assessment. Econ Geogr 72:259–292
McCann P (2007) Sketching out a model of innovation, face-to-face interaction and economic geography.
     Spatial Econ Anal 2:117–134



                                                                                             123
430                                                                                  G. F. Mulligan et al.


McCann P (2005) Transport costs and new economic geography. J Econ Geogr 5:305–318
McLafferty S, Ghosh A (1984) A simulation model of spatial competition with multipurpose trips. Geogr
      Anal 16:244–249
McLafferty S, Ghosh A (1987) Optimal location and allocation with multipurpose shopping. In: Ghosh A,
      Rushton G (eds) Spatial analysis and location-allocation models. Von Nostrand Reinhold, New York
      pp 55–75
Mori T (1997) A modeling of the megalopolis: the maturing of city systems. J Urban Econ 42:133–157
Mori T, Smith TE (2011) An industrial agglomeration approach to central place and city size regularities.
      J Reg Sci 51:694–731
Mori T, Nishikimi K, Smith TE (2008) The number-average size rule: a newempirical relationship between
      industrial location and city size. J Reg Sci 48:165–211
Mulligan GF (1984) Agglomeration and central place theory: a review of the literature. Int Reg Sci Rev
      9:1–42
Mulligan GF (1991) Equality measures and facility location. Pap Reg Sci 70:345–365
Mulligan GF (2000) Resolving location conflict with standardized space-cost curves. Professional Geog-
      rapher 52:50–60
Mulligan GF, Fik TJ (1994) Price and location conjectures in medium- and long-run spatial competition
      models. J Reg Sci 34:179–198
Mulligan GF, Fik TJ (1995) Consistent price and location conjectures in spatial competition models. Ann
      Reg Sci 29:91–109
Neary JP (2001) Of hype and hyperbolas: introducing the new economic geography. J Econ Lit 39:536–561
Nijkamp P (2000) Review of The economy: cities, regions, and international trade. Econ J 111:F166–F168
Norman G (1986) Spatial pricing and differentiated markets. Pion, London
North DC (1955) Location theory and regional economic growth. J Polit Econ 63:243–258
Olfert MR, Stabler JC (1999) Multipliers in a central place hierarchy. Growth Change 30:288–302
Ottaviano G, Tubuchi T, Thisse JF (2002) Agglomeration and trade revisited. Int Econ Rev 43:409–435
Overman HG, Ioannides YM (2001) Cross sectional evolution of the U.S. city size distribution. J Urban
      Econ 49:543–566
Parr JB, Denike KG (1970) Theoretical problems in central place analysis. Econ Geogr 46:567–586
Partridge MD (2010) The duelling models: NEG vs amenity migration in explaining us engines of growth.
      Pap Reg Sci 89:513–536
Partridge MD, Olfert MR (2011) The Winners’ choice: sustainable economic strategies for successful 21st
      century regions. Appl Econ Policy Perspect 33:143–178
Partridge MD, Rickman DS, Ali K, Olfert MR (2008) Employment growth in the American urban hierarchy:
      long live distance. Berkeley Electronic J Macroecon 8:1–36
Partridge MD, Rickman DS, Ali K, Olfert MR (2008) Lost in space: population dynamics in the American
      hinterlands and small cities. J Econ Geogr 8:727–757
Partridge MD, Rickman DS, Ali K, Olfert MR (2009) Agglomeration spillovers and wage and housing cost
      gradients across the urban hierarchy. J Int Econ 78:126–140
Pierce NR, Johnson CW (2008) Century of the city: no time to loose. The Rockefeller Foundation,
      New York
Polèse M, Shearmur R (2004) Culture, language, and the location of high-order service functions: the case
      of Montreal and Toronto. Econ Geogr 80:329–350
Polèse M, Shearmur R (2004) Is distance really dead? Comparing industrial location over time in Canada.
      Int Reg Sci Rev 27:431–457
Polèse M, Shearmur R (2006) Growth and location of economic activity: the spatial dynamics of industries
      in Canada, 1971–2001. Growth Change 37:362–395
Polèse M, Rubiera-Morollón F, Shearmur R (2007) Observing regularities in location patterns: an analysis
      of the spatial distribution of economic activity in Spain. Eur Urban Reg Stud 14:157–180
Polèse M, Denis-Jacob J (2010) Changes at the top: a cross-country examination over the 20th century of
      the rise (and fall) in rank of the top cities in national urban hierarchies. Urban Stud 47:1843–1860
Popper FJ (1981) The politics of land use reform. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison
Portnov BA, Schwartz M (2009) Urban clusters as growth foci. J Reg Sci 49:287–310
Puga D (2010) The magnitude and causes of agglomeration economies. J Reg Sci 50:203–220
Reilly WJ (1929) Methods for the study of retail relationships. University of Texas, Austin
Renkow M, Hoover D (2000) Commuting, migration, and rural-urban population dynamics. J Reg Sci
      40:261–287



123
Central place theory and its reemergence in regional science                                          431


Rosenthal SS, Strange WC (2008) The attenuation of human capital spillovers. J Urban Econ 41:373–389
Rosenthal SS, Strange WC (2006) The micro-empirics of agglomeration economies. In: Arnott RJ,
      McMillen DP (eds) A companion to urban economics. Blackwell, Oxford pp 7–23
Rushton G (1969) Analysis of spatial behavior by revealed space preference. Ann Am Assoc Geogr
      57:391–400
Sassen S (1991) The global city. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Saichev A, Malevergne Y, Sornette D (2010) Theory of Zipf’s law and beyond. Springer, The Netherlands
Simon H (1952) A behavioral model of rational choice. Q J Econ 69:99–118
Shonkwiler JS, Harris TS (1993) A non-Gaussian time series analysis of rural retail business counts. J Reg
      Sci 33:37–48
Smithies A (1941) Optimum Location in Spatial Location. J Polit Econ 49:423–439
Smolin L (1997) The Trouble With Physics: The Rise of String Theory, the Fall of Science, and What
      Comes Next. Mariner Books, USA
Stephens DW, Krebs JR (1986) Foraging theory. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Stern N (1972) The optimal size of market areas. J Econ Theory 4:154–173
Tabuchi T, Thisse JF (2002) Taste heterogeneity, labor mobility and economic geography. J Dev Econ
      69:155–177
Tabuchi T, Thisse JF (2006) Regional specialization, urban hierarchy, and commuting costs. Int Econ Rev
      47:1295–1317
Tabuchi T, Thisse JF (2011) A new economic geography model of central places. J Urban Econ 69:240–252
Talen E, Ellis C (2002) Beyond relativism: reclaiming the search for good city form. J Planning Educ Res
      22:36–49
Thill JC (1986) A note on multipurpose and multistop shopping, sales, and market areas of firms. J Reg Sci
      26:775–784
Tversky A, Kahneman D (1974) Judgment under uncertainty: heuristics and biases. Science 185:1124–1131
Ulfarsson GF, Carruthers JI (2006) The cycle of fragmentation and sprawl: a conceptual framework and
      empirical model. Environ Planning B 33:767–788
von Böventer E (1963) Toward a unified theory of spatial economic structure. Pap Reg Sci Assoc
      10:163–187
Wensley RDM, Stabler JC (1998) Demand-threshold estimation for business activities in rural Saskatche-
      wan. J Reg Sci 38:155–177
West D, Hohenbalken Bvon (1984) Spatial predation in a Canadian retail oligopoly. J Reg Sci 24:415–429
Williamson OE (1975) Markets and hierarchies. Free Press, New York
Williamson OE (1985) The economic institutions of capitalism. Free Press, New York
White RW (1974) Sketches of a dynamic central place theory. Econ Geogr 50:219–227
White RW (1977) Dynamic central place theory: results of a simulation approach. Geogr Anal 9:226–243
White RW (1978) The simulation of central place populations: two-sector-systems and the rank-size dis-
      tribution. Geogr Anal 58:552–574
Wu JJ, Gopinath M (2008) What causes spatial variations in economic development in the United States.
      Am J Agric Econ 90:392–408
Xiao Y (2011) Local economic impacts of natural disasters. J Reg Sci 51:804–820




                                                                                             123
